1 . A microparticle filter suitable for filtering microparticles from effluent from a textile treatment apparatus, the filter comprising: a filter chamber comprising chamber walls, an inlet and an outlet; a filter medium contained within the filter chamber, the filter medium configured to filter microparticles from the effluent forming a filter residue and providing a filtered effluent to the outlet; a filter residue collection chamber located external to the filter chamber; a filter residue removal apparatus; and wherein the chamber walls comprise an opening and a moveable member movable between a first and a second configuration; wherein: in the first configuration the moveable member cooperates with the chamber walls to seal the filter chamber so entry of the effluent into the filter chamber is through the inlet only, and exit of the filtered effluent from the filter chamber is through the outlet only; and in the second configuration the moveable member has moved to provide an opening in the chamber walls so that the filter residue removal apparatus is operable to remove filter residue from the within the filter chamber to the filter residue collection chamber through the opening.
2. A microparticle filter according to claim 1 , wherein the filter medium comprises a central axis through the centre of the filter medium and the filter medium is rotatable around the central axis.
3. A microparticle filter according to claim 2 wherein filter residue removal apparatus comprises a rotary actuator configured to rotate the filter medium to throw filter residue off the filter medium.
4. A microparticle filter according to any preceding claim, wherein the moveable member and the opening extend around the perimeter of the filter chamber.
5. A microparticle filter according to any preceding claim, wherein the filter residue collection chamber extends around a perimeter of the filter chamber.
6. A microparticle filter according to any preceding claim, wherein the moveable member is shaped as a frustrum, a cone, a cylinder, or a pyramid.
57
7. A microparticle filter according to any preceding claim, wherein the movable member moves linearly between the first and second configurations; and optionally wherein the moveable member moves linearly in the horizontal direction.
8. A microparticle filter according to any preceding claim, wherein the microparticle filter comprises a linear actuator to move the moveable member between the first and second configurations; and optionally wherein the linear actuator is connected directly to the moveable member, and/or optionally wherein a rotatable linkage is present between the linear actuator and the moveable member.
9. A microparticle filter according to any preceding claim, wherein the filter medium is in the shape of a paraboloid, hemispheroid, hemi-ellipsoid, pyramid, cone, frustrum, cylinder, or prism.
10. A microparticle filter according to any preceding claim, wherein the filter residue collection chamber is or comprises a portion that is slidably removable the microparticle filter.
11. A microparticle filter according to claim 2 or any claim dependent thereon, wherein the inlet is coincident with the central axis of the filter medium.
12. A microparticle filter according to claim 2 or any claim dependent thereon, wherein the outlet is positioned further radially outwards from the central axis than the inlet.
13. A microparticle filter according to claim 2 or any claim dependent thereon, wherein the filter chamber comprises a first end wall and an opposed second end wall, wherein both ends are coincident with the central axis and the inlet is arranged at the first end wall of the filter chamber, and optionally wherein the second end wall is comprised as part of the moveable member.
14. A microparticle filter according to claim 13, wherein the filter chamber comprises one or more sidewalls between the first and second end walls, and wherein the outlet is in the sidewall of the filter chamber; and wherein the outlet is between the filter medium and the first end wall, and/or wherein the outlet is adjacent to the first end wall of the filter chamber; and/or wherein the sidewall is circular when viewed in a cross-section perpendicular to the central axis and the outlet is aligned parallel to a tangent of the sidewall cross section.
15. A microparticle filter according to claim 14 when dependent on claim 8, wherein the linear actuator is proximal to the second end wall of the filter chamber.
58
16. A microparticle filter according to any preceding claim, wherein an impellor or impellor blades are rotatably mounted in the filter chamber.
17. A microparticle filter according to claim 16, wherein the impellor or impellor blades are positioned downstream_of the filter medium.
18. A microparticle filter according to claim 17, wherein the impellor or impellor blades are positioned adjacent to and radially inwards of the outlet.
19. A microparticle filter according to any of claim 16 to 18, wherein the impellor or impellor blades are arranged to rotate with the filter medium.
20. A microparticle filter according to any preceding claim wherein the filter chamber comprises a pipe connected to the inlet, wherein the pipe passes though centre filter medium, and optionally wherein the pipe is arranged to rotate with the filter medium.
21. A microparticle filter according to claim 20 when dependent on any of claims 16 to 19, wherein the pipe passes through the centre of the impellor and optionally wherein the pipe rotates with the impellor.
22. A microparticle filter according to any preceding claim, wherein the filter chamber comprises a baffle; the baffle located within the filter chamber and rigidly connected to the chamber walls, wherein the baffle is adjacent to the filter medium.
23. A microparticle filter according to claim 22, wherein the filter medium comprises a second surface which is the surface from which filtered effluent passes from during filtration, and the baffle is adjacent to the second surface of the filter medium.
24. microparticle filter comprises a filter support in the filter chamber, wherein the filter medium is retained in a three-dimensional shape by the filter support.
25. A microparticle filter according to claim 2 or any claim dependent thereon, wherein the filter medium comprises a first surface on which filter residue accumulates during filtration and the first surface of the filter medium faces radially outwards from the central axis.
26. A microparticle filter according to any preceding claim, wherein the microparticle filter is fluidly connected to a textile treatment apparatus.
27. A microparticle filter according to any preceding claim wherein the microparticle filter is operable to drain the effluent from the filter chamber in the first configuration to reduce the water content of the filter residue.
28. A microparticle filter according to any preceding claim, wherein the filter residue removal apparatus is operable to remove filter residue with the filter chamber empty of effluent.
59
29. A microparticle filter according to any preceding claim, wherein the filter residue removal apparatus is operable to remove filter residue when the filter residue is in a non- flowable state.
30. A microparticle filter according to claim 29 wherein the filter residue removal apparatus is operable to remove filter residue when the filter residue has been dewatered.
31. A microparticle filter according to claim 2 or any claim dependent thereon, wherein the filter residue collection chamber is positioned radially outwards of the filter medium with respect to the central axis.
32. A microparticle filter according to any preceding claim, wherein filter residue collection chamber surrounds the periphery of the filter medium.
33. A microparticle filter according to claim 2 or any claim dependent thereon, wherein the filter residue removal apparatus comprises an actuator to rotate the filter medium about a central axis to centrifugally move residue to the filter residue collection chamber.
34. A microparticle filter according to claim 33, wherein the filter residue collection chamber comprises a collection wall aligned parallel to the central axis and arranged radially outwards of the moveable member, and optionally extends 360 degrees around the central axis.
35. A microparticle filter according to any preceding claim, wherein the filter residue collection chamber is detachable from the filter chamber to assist a user to empty residue therefrom.
36. A microparticle filter according to any preceding claim, wherein the filter medium is removable from the filter chamber to assist cleaning of the filter medium by a user.
37. A microparticle filter according to any preceding claim, or any claim dependent on either of these claims, wherein the inlet is coaxially aligned with the central axis.
38. A microparticle filter according to any preceding claim, wherein the filter medium comprises a mesh.
39. A textile treatment apparatus comprising the microparticle filter according to any previous claim.
40. A textile treatment apparatus according to claim 39, comprising a drum, the drum having a capacity from 150 L to 20,000 L.
41. Use of the microparticle filter or textile treatment apparatus according to any previous claims, for filtering microparticles from an effluent stream comprising effluent from treated textiles.
60
42. The use according to claim 41 , wherein the textiles comprise cotton or polycotton; and/or optionally wherein the treated textiles are textiles being treated by washing; and/or optionally wherein the use of the microparticle filter or textile treatment apparatus is for filtering cellulose microparticles.
43. A method of filtering microparticles from effluent from a textile treatment apparatus, the method comprising: i. supplying effluent from a textile treatment apparatus to a microparticle filter, the microparticle filter comprising a filter chamber and a filter medium contained therein, a filter residue removal apparatus and a filter residue collection chamber external to the filter chamber; ii. filtering microparticles from the effluent through the filter medium to form a microparticle containing filter residue in the filter chamber; iii. stopping the supply of effluent to the microparticle filter; iv. opening the filter chamber to provide access from the filter chamber to the filter residue collection chamber; v. operating a filter residue removal apparatus to remove the microparticle containing residue from the filter chamber to a filter residue collection chamber via the opening in the filter chamber; vi. closing the filter chamber.
44. A method according to claim 43, further comprising the steps: vii. repeating steps i. to vi. one or more times; ix. emptying the microparticle containing residue from the residue collection chamber.
45. A method according any of claims 43 or 44, wherein the filter residue may be dewatered between steps iii and iv.
46. A method of filtering microparticles from effluent from a textile treatment apparatus comprising: i. providing a microparticle filter according to any of claims 1 to 38; ii. placing the microparticle in the first configuration; iii. supplying effluent from a textile treatment apparatus to the inlet of the microparticle filter; iv. filtering the effluent through the filter medium and passing the filtered effluent to the outlet;
61 v. stopping the supply of effluent; vi. placing the microparticle filter in the second configuration; vii. operating the filter residue removal apparatus to transfer filter residue from the filter chamber to the filter residue collection chamber.
47. A method according to any of claims 43 to 46 wherein the method is of filtering cellulose microparticles from an effluent stream from a textile treatment which has treated cellulose containing textiles.
48. A method according to claim 46 or claim 47 when dependent on claim 46, further comprising the subsequent steps of: viii. moving the moveable member back to the first configuration; ix. resuming supply and filtering of effluent.
49. A method according to claim 48, further comprising the steps: x. repeating steps ii. to viii. one or more times; xi. emptying the microparticle containing residue from the residue collection chamber.
50. A method according to any of claims 44 to 49, wherein stopping the supply of effluent comprises operating a valve upstream of the microparticle filter.
51. A method according any of claims 46 to 49, wherein the filter residue is dewatered between steps v and vi.
52. A method according to claim 45 or claim 51 or any claim dependent thereon, wherein dewatering may comprise any of rotating the filter medium to centrifugally remove water from the residue, blowing air through the residue, heating the residue or applying a vacuum to the residue or any combination thereof.
53. A method according to claim 52, wherein the filter residue is dewatered in the filter chamber.
54. A method according to any of claims 44 to 53, wherein the supply of effluent is from a single treatment cycle of the textile treatment apparatus.