--- PAGE 1 ---\nAcademic Editors: Sabina
Ziembowicz and Małgorzata Kida
Received: 2 January 2025
Revised: 20 January 2025
Accepted: 24 January 2025
Published: 27 January 2025
Citation: Park, B.; Yoon, H.-J.; Park,
H. Development and Efficiency
Evaluation of Microplastic Removal
Filter for Laundry Machines. Water
2025, 17, 358. https://doi.org/
10.3390/w17030358
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
Development and Efficiency Evaluation of Microplastic Removal
Filter for Laundry Machines
Beomseok Park 1, Hee-Jung Yoon 2 and Hanbai Park 1,*
1 Korea Microplastic Research Center Co., Ltd., 2nd Floor, 88, Daejeo-Ro 299 St.,
Busan 46702, Republic of Korea; kmpr@kmpr.co.kr or hotduck13@naver.com
2 Taeyoungunion Co., Ltd., 320, Woni-daero, Seongsan-gu, Changwon 51408, Republic of Korea;
taeyoungunion@daum.net
* Correspondence: parkhanbai@gmail.com
Abstract: Microplastics contained in laundry wastewater are identified as the main cause
of marine microplastics, accounting for approximately 35% of marine microplastics. In
this study, a four-stage microplastic filter for laundry wastewater was developed and the
removal rates of microplastics, COD, SS, and turbidity were checked through 50 tests to
confirm the efficiency of the filter. The microplastic removal rate was confirmed using
µFTIR with a high efficiency of 98.5% on average for 50 tests. The microplastics contained
in laundry wastewater were identified as 57% PE, 9% PET, 9% PA, 8% PU, 8% PP , 6%
PPMA, and 3% PAN. COD was measured using the COD manganese method, and the
COD removal rate of the laundry wastewater filter was an average of 92% for 50 times. SS
was verified by filtration using a vacuum pump and the average removal rate was 80%
during 50 tests. Turbidity was confirmed with an average removal rate of 88% using a
turbidity meter. As a result of the experiment, it was confirmed that when the developed
filter was installed in laundry wastewater, not only microplastics but also various water
pollutants were reduced. In addition, the water quality pollution index showing the
highest correlation with microplastics in laundry wastewater was SS, and the p-value was
confirmed to be 0.000.
Keywords: microplastics in laundry wastewater; microplastic removal filter; laundry
wastewater pollutants removal by filtration; µFTIR analysis
1. Introduction
Plastic pieces less than 5 mm in size, called microplastics, are an emerging major
environmental pollution issue worldwide. In 2017, microplastic fibers released during
the laundry process were found to account for approximately 35% of global microplastic
marine pollution [1]. During the laundry process, microplastics are created as microfibers
are mechanically and chemically separated, and it was confirmed that wastewater treatment
plants cannot block all microfibers that are released due to their micro or nanosize [2–4]. In
order to reduce microplastics in the ocean, it is necessary to reduce microplastics in laundry
wastewater, and preventive measures include improving washing machine technology,
using filters, and changing clothing materials. Among these, the most efficient method that
can be applied to existing washing machines is a laundry water filter. There are several
factors that contribute to the creation of microfibers during laundry. First, it was confirmed
that clothing made from natural fabrics releases more microfibers when washed than
clothing made from synthetic fabrics [5]. Second, the age of clothing can affect microfiber
shedding. Several studies have found that new clothes release more microfibers than old
Water 2025, 17, 358 https://doi.org/10.3390/w17030358\n\n--- PAGE 2 ---\nWater 2025, 17, 358 2 of 16
ones [6,7]; however, Hernandez (2017) found that older clothes released more microfibers
than new clothes depending on the type of clothing [ 8]. Third, it was confirmed that
the discharge of microfibers differs depending on the temperature of the laundry water
and the type of laundry machine. Several studies have shown that hot washing results
in more microfibers being released than cold washing [ 5,9]. Depending on the type of
laundry machine, top-loader types (regular laundry machines) were found to emit more
microfibers than front-loader types (drum laundry machines) [10,11]. Fourth, the amount
of clothes for washing significantly affected the release of microfibers. Volgare et al. (2021)
confirmed that as the washing load increased, friction decreased and microfiber release
decreased, and when the washing load decreased, microfiber release increased by about
5 times due to increased mechanical stress [12]. Additionally, microfiber release increased
or decreased depending on the type of detergent, fabric softener, and laundry machine
operation method [13,14].
Accordingly, there are several ways to alleviate microplastic pollution in laundry
wastewater. First, there are improvement measures by consumers and suppliers, such
as reducing the number of washes, reducing clothing consumption, and changing textile
production methods. Second, washing machine suppliers are taking steps to improve their
washing machines, such as changing washing methods, developing new washing machines
with a new filtration system, conserving water, and improving detergents. However, both
methods are not easy to apply to general households. Accordingly, the most important
priority approach to reduce microfiber emissions is to develop a laundry machine-specific
filter and install it at the back of the laundry water discharge port to filter and release it out.
Global plastic use has increased steadily since the 1960s, reaching 367 million tons
in 2020 and is expected to continually increase [ 6]. The increase in the use of plastics is
accelerating the rapid increase in microplastics. In particular, it can lead to an increase in
marine microplastics, which is the final stage.
Many researchers are conducting research on the method of microfiber emission, the
source and path, and the method of removing microfibers from the emission source to study
the control method of microplastics [15–17]. In particular, several studies were conducted
on microplastic removal methods in sewage treatment plants where laundry wastewater is
primarily discharged and controlled [18,19]. Traditional secondary and tertiary wastewater
treatment was shown to remove up to 98% of microplastics in water [ 20]. Alvitie et al.
(2017) confirmed that 99% of microplastics were removed using a 0.4 µm membrane
and a biologically active filter [ 21]. Murphy et al. (2016) reported that despite a 98%
removal of microplastics in a Scottish WWTP , approximately 6.5 × 107 MPs were still
released into the aquatic environment every day [2]. Despite the removal of microplastics
in sewage treatment plants, millions of microplastics are still being released into rivers
every day. While many studies have focused on removing microplastics in wastewater
treatment plants, few practical strategies have been proposed to reduce emissions during
household laundry processes. In addition, research on the efficiency, economic feasibility,
and practicality of laundry water filters is limited.
In this study, our aim is to reduce microplastics in laundry water by developing a
microplastic filter that is installed on the laundry machine outlet. The microplastic filter
was developed as a four-stage filter. The first filter is a 1270 µm stainless steel filter that
mainly removes large microfibers, and the second filter is a 508 µm stainless steel filter
that removes microplastics that were not removed in the first stage. The third filter is
a 101 µm stainless steel filter that removes microfibers larger than 100 µm. The fourth
filter is a 0.3 µm glass fiber filter that removes microplastics smaller than 100 µm. The
developed filter can be installed on the washing water drain outlet to be compatible with
various washing machine models for expandability, and the maximum lifespan of the\n\n--- PAGE 3 ---\nWater 2025, 17, 358 3 of 16
filter was measured for practicality to confirm the replacement period and maintenance
method of the filter. This filtration filter system is a groundbreaking technology that can
reduce microplastics, turbidity, SS, and COD in laundry wastewater. In order to verify
the efficiency of the filtration system, microplastics, turbidity, SS, and COD in laundry
wastewater were checked before and after treatment.
2. Materials and Methods
The test method was divided into a manufacturing section for the laundry wastewater
filter to explain the structure of the developed filter and an experimental section to confirm
the removal of microplastics and other pollutants using the developed filter.
2.1. Filter Developing Method
The developed laundry wastewater filter was manufactured to filter approximately
15 L/min of washing machine wastewater. It was manufactured as a four-stage filtration
system that can remove microplastics, suspended solids, and other contaminants. Before
manufacturing the product, it was designed as shown in Figure 1 to remove microfibers
step by step through the cyclone water flow.
Water 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 18 
 
 
developed ﬁlter can be installed on the washing water drain outlet to be compatible with 
various washing machine models for expandability, and the maximum lifespan of the ﬁl-
ter was measured for practicality to con ﬁrm the replacement period and maintenance 
method of the ﬁlter. This ﬁltration ﬁlter system is a groundbreaking technology that can 
reduce microplastics, turbidity, SS, and COD in laundry wastewater. In order to verify the 
eﬃciency of the ﬁltration system, microplastics, turbidity, SS, and COD in laundry 
wastewater were checked before and after treatment. 
2. Materials and Methods 
The test method was divided into a manufacturing section for the laundry 
wastewater ﬁlter to explain the structure of the developed ﬁlter and an experimental sec-
tion to con ﬁrm the removal of microplastics and other pollutants using the developed 
ﬁlter. 
2.1. Filter Developing Method 
The developed laundry wastewater ﬁlter was manufactured to ﬁlter approximately 
15 L/min of washing machine wastewater. It was manufactured as a four-stage ﬁltration 
system that can remove microplastics, suspended solids, and other contaminants. Before 
manufacturing the product, it was designed as shown in Figure 1 to remove micro ﬁbers 
step by step through the cyclone water ﬂow. 
  
(a) ( b) 
Figure 1. Laundry ﬁlter design: (a) laundry ﬁlter design rendering image; (b) design of laundry ﬁlter 
drawing. 
After designing the product, modeling was performed using Soildworks 2024 to eval-
uate the performance of the product and check the water ﬂow of the virtual product, as 
shown in Figure 2. In the results, it was con ﬁrmed that the product was designed in a 
circular shape, and the physical separation occurred quickly due to the acceleration and 
gravity generated from the high ﬂow rate from the centrifuge, which increased the re-
moval eﬃciency of microplastics and suspended solids. 
Figure 1. Laundry filter design: ( a) laundry filter design rendering image; ( b) design of laundry
filter drawing.
After designing the product, modeling was performed using Soildworks 2024 to
evaluate the performance of the product and check the water flow of the virtual product,
as shown in Figure 2. In the results, it was confirmed that the product was designed in a
circular shape, and the physical separation occurred quickly due to the acceleration and
gravity generated from the high flow rate from the centrifuge, which increased the removal
efficiency of microplastics and suspended solids.
Based on the modeling results, the laundry wastewater filter was manufactured as
shown in Figure 3. The filter parts were designed and manufactured by dividing them
into four filter nets, a part connected to the washing machine, and a part connected to the
drain. The primary filter is a net-shaped woven wire made of stainless steel 304 with a
pore diameter of 1270 µm. The secondary filter is also made of stainless steel 304 and has
a pore diameter of 508 µm. The tertiary filter is also made of stainless steel 304 and has a
pore diameter of 100 µm. The 4th filter is a 0.3 µm filter made of glass fiber. All filters are
designed and custom-made according to the dimensions. The manufactured product can
be inserted directly into the sewage outlet and connected to the washing machine drain
hose. The water discharged from the washing machine passes through the developed filter
and flows out to the sewage outlet.\n\n--- PAGE 4 ---\nWater 2025, 17, 358 4 of 16
Water 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 18 
 
 
  
(a) ( b) 
  
(c)  (d) 
Figure 2. Laundry ﬁlter ﬂuid modeling using Solidworks 2024: (a) laundry ﬁlter 3D image; (b) top 
view of laundry ﬁlter ﬂuid ﬂow; (c) side view of laundry ﬁlter ﬂuid ﬂow; (d) velocity view of laun-
dry ﬁlter ﬂuid ﬂow. 
Based on the modeling results, the laundry wastewater ﬁlter was manufactured as 
shown in Figure 3. The ﬁlter parts were designed and ma nufactured by dividing them 
into four ﬁlter nets, a part connected to the washing machine, and a part connected to the 
drain. The primary ﬁlter is a net-shaped woven wire made of stainless steel 304 with a 
pore diameter of 1270 µm. The secondary ﬁlter is also made of stainless steel 304 and has 
a pore diameter of 508 µm. The tertiary ﬁlter is also made of stainless steel 304 and has a 
pore diameter of 100 µm. The 4th ﬁlter is a 0.3 µm ﬁlter made of glass ﬁber. All ﬁlters are 
designed and custom-made according to the dimensions. The manufactured product can 
be inserted directly into the sewage outlet  and connected to the washing machine drain 
hose. The water discharged from the washing machine passes through the developed ﬁl-
ter and ﬂows out to the sewage outlet. 
  
(a) ( b) 
Figure 2. Laundry filter fluid modeling using Solidworks 2024: (a) laundry filter 3D image; (b) top
view of laundry filter fluid flow; (c) side view of laundry filter fluid flow; (d) velocity view of laundry
filter fluid flow.
Water 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 18 
 
 
  
(a) ( b) 
  
(c)  (d) 
Figure 2. Laundry ﬁlter ﬂuid modeling using Solidworks 2024: (a) laundry ﬁlter 3D image; (b) top 
view of laundry ﬁlter ﬂuid ﬂow; (c) side view of laundry ﬁlter ﬂuid ﬂow; (d) velocity view of laun-
dry ﬁlter ﬂuid ﬂow. 
Based on the modeling results, the laundry wastewater ﬁlter was manufactured as 
shown in Figure 3. The ﬁlter parts were designed and ma nufactured by dividing them 
into four ﬁlter nets, a part connected to the washing machine, and a part connected to the 
drain. The primary ﬁlter is a net-shaped woven wire made of stainless steel 304 with a 
pore diameter of 1270 µm. The secondary ﬁlter is also made of stainless steel 304 and has 
a pore diameter of 508 µm. The tertiary ﬁlter is also made of stainless steel 304 and has a 
pore diameter of 100 µm. The 4th ﬁlter is a 0.3 µm ﬁlter made of glass ﬁber. All ﬁlters are 
designed and custom-made according to the dimensions. The manufactured product can 
be inserted directly into the sewage outlet  and connected to the washing machine drain 
hose. The water discharged from the washing machine passes through the developed ﬁl-
ter and ﬂows out to the sewage outlet. 
  
(a) ( b) 
Water 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 18 
 
 
  
(c) ( d) 
Figure 3. Laundry ﬁlter parts and manufacturing process: ( a) ﬁlters used in laundry ﬁlter system; 
(b) parts used in laundry ﬁlter system; ( c) assembled laundry ﬁlter system; ( d) installed laundry 
ﬁlter system. 
2.2. Laundry Wastewater Filter Eﬃciency Test Method 
To test the replacement cycle and e ﬃciency of the developed ﬁlter, 50 repeated ex-
periments were performed and microplastics, COD, SS, and turbidity were analyzed in 
the discharge wastewater and the wastewater after ﬁltration. The concentrations of micro-
plastics, COD, SS, and turbidity in the laundry discharge water before and after the ﬁlter 
were compared to verify the removal e ﬃciency of the ﬁlter. The laundry was performed 
at 5 kg/load using general clothing, towels, and socks. 
2.2.1. Microplastic Analytical Method 
Microplastic analysis was performed using a Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) mi-
croscope (IN10MX, Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) and a digital mi-
croscope (DSZM-7045T, Dongwon Industries, Seoul, Republic of Korea). The microplastic 
ﬁlter used was made of stainless steel with a pore size of 20 µm and a diameter of 25 mm. 
It was vacuum-ﬁltered and measured using an FTIR microscope. 
Raman spectroscopy, pyrolysis GC-MS, and uFTIR are widely used methods for an-
alyzing microplastics. uFTIR can analyze small particles less than 20 µm in high resolution 
based on the unique vibration spectrum of the polymer without damaging the sample, so 
it was selected as suitable for laundry wa stewater. Pyrolysis GC-MS was excluded be-
cause it could not con ﬁrm the shape and particle size of  microplastics, and Raman spec-
troscopy was excluded because it can cause ﬂuorescence interference from colored micro-
ﬁbers or speci ﬁc polymers. Cross-validation was co nsidered using Raman spectroscopy 
and u-FTIR, but since it required many experiments, it was decided to proceed when com-
mercializing the ﬁlter product. 
Figure 4 shows microplastic analysis sequ ence using µFTIR. FTIR microscopy ana-
lyzes one quarter of a 25 mm mass ﬁlter at a time, and the entire ﬁlter is analyzed four 
times. The number, material, and length of microplastics in the analyzed ﬁlter were con-
ﬁrmed using FTIR microscope software. The ty pe of microplastic was determined based 
on the FTIR spectra data provided by the FTIR  software. The plastic type criterion is de-
termined to be a speciﬁc plastic type if the match rate is 70% or higher and the same plastic 
i s  f o u n d  m o r e  t h a n  1 0  t i m e s .  T h e  s i z e  o f  microplastics was measured by their longest 
length (maximum ferret diameter) [22]. 
Figure 3. Laundry filter parts and manufacturing process: (a) filters used in laundry filter system;
(b) parts used in laundry filter system; ( c) assembled laundry filter system; ( d) installed laundry
filter system.\n\n--- PAGE 5 ---\nWater 2025, 17, 358 5 of 16
2.2. Laundry Wastewater Filter Efficiency Test Method
To test the replacement cycle and efficiency of the developed filter, 50 repeated ex-
periments were performed and microplastics, COD, SS, and turbidity were analyzed in
the discharge wastewater and the wastewater after filtration. The concentrations of mi-
croplastics, COD, SS, and turbidity in the laundry discharge water before and after the filter
were compared to verify the removal efficiency of the filter. The laundry was performed at
5 kg/load using general clothing, towels, and socks.
2.2.1. Microplastic Analytical Method
Microplastic analysis was performed using a Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) micro-
scope (IN10MX, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) and a digital microscope
(DSZM-7045T, Dongwon Industries, Seoul, Republic of Korea). The microplastic filter used
was made of stainless steel with a pore size of 20 µm and a diameter of 25 mm. It was
vacuum-filtered and measured using an FTIR microscope.
Raman spectroscopy, pyrolysis GC-MS, and uFTIR are widely used methods for ana-
lyzing microplastics. uFTIR can analyze small particles less than 20 µm in high resolution
based on the unique vibration spectrum of the polymer without damaging the sample, so it
was selected as suitable for laundry wastewater. Pyrolysis GC-MS was excluded because it
could not confirm the shape and particle size of microplastics, and Raman spectroscopy
was excluded because it can cause fluorescence interference from colored microfibers or
specific polymers. Cross-validation was considered using Raman spectroscopy and u-FTIR,
but since it required many experiments, it was decided to proceed when commercializing
the filter product.
Figure 4 shows microplastic analysis sequence usingµFTIR. FTIR microscopy analyzes
one quarter of a 25 mm mass filter at a time, and the entire filter is analyzed four times. The
number, material, and length of microplastics in the analyzed filter were confirmed using
FTIR microscope software. The type of microplastic was determined based on the FTIR
spectra data provided by the FTIR software. The plastic type criterion is determined to be a
specific plastic type if the match rate is 70% or higher and the same plastic is found more
than 10 times. The size of microplastics was measured by their longest length (maximum
ferret diameter) [22].
Water 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 18 
 
 
  
(a) ( b) 
Figure 4. Microplastic mesh ﬁlter image and microplastic identi ﬁcation process. ( a) 25 mm mesh 
ﬁlter used for analysis of microplastics, imaged by FTIR microscope. ( b) Determination of micro-
plastics using OMNIC 9.16. 
To check the micro ﬁber removal rate of the laundry ﬁlter, the diﬀerence before and 
after passing through the laundry ﬁlter was determined in the form of the following for-
mula: 
𝑀𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑎𝑙 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒(%) =
𝐼𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡 𝑀𝑃𝑠 ቀ𝑒𝑎
𝐿 ቁ−𝑂 𝑢 𝑡 𝑝 𝑢 𝑡  𝑀 𝑃 𝑠 (𝑒𝑎
𝐿 )
𝐼𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡 𝑀𝑃𝑠(𝑒𝑎
𝐿 )
 × 100 (1) 
2.2.2. Chemical Oxygen Demand Analytical Method 
Chemical oxygen demand, called COD, was measured before and after passing 
through the laundry ﬁlter to conﬁrm the organic matter removal rate of the laundry ﬁlter. 
COD is used as an indicator to determine the amount of dissolved oxygen needed to oxi-
dize organic matter in water with an oxidizing agent [23,24]. The COD manganese method 
was used to check how much COD the laundry water ﬁlter removes. The COD manganese 
method is a method of measuring the amou nt of oxygen consumed by adding 0.025 N 
potassium permanganate to a wash water sample, heating it in a water bath for 30 min, 
and then checking the amount of potassium permanganate consumed. The COD removal 
rate was conﬁrmed by measuring the di ﬀerence in COD between the laundry discharge 
water before and after passing through the ﬁlter. The removal rate was determined in the 
form of the following formula: 
𝐶𝑂𝐷 𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑎𝑙 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒(%) =
𝐼𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡 𝐶𝑂𝐷 ቀ𝑚𝑔
𝐿 ቁ−𝑂 𝑢 𝑡 𝑝 𝑢 𝑡  𝐶 𝑂 𝐷 (𝑚𝑔
𝐿 )
𝐼𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡 𝐶𝑂𝐷 (𝑚𝑔
𝐿 )
 × 100 (2) 
2.2.3. Suspended Solid Analytical Method 
Suspended solid, called SS, was measured before and after passing through the de-
veloped laundry ﬁlter to conﬁrm the total suspended solid removal rate of the developed 
ﬁlter. SS is used as an indicator to check suspended solids in water [25]. SS was used as an 
indicator to check how e ﬃcient the ﬁlter is in removing microplastics and other ﬂoating 
pollutants. The measurement method used was to shake 1 L of laundry discharge water 
using a glass ﬁber ﬁlter and then ﬁlter 250 mL of water using a vacuum pump to check 
the weight diﬀerence in the glass ﬁber ﬁlter before and after the experiment. The di ﬀer-
ence was conﬁrmed by measuring the laundry discharge water before and after passing 
Figure 4. Microplastic mesh filter image and microplastic identification process. (a) 25 mm mesh filter
used for analysis of microplastics, imaged by FTIR microscope. (b) Determination of microplastics
using OMNIC 9.16.\n\n--- PAGE 6 ---\nWater 2025, 17, 358 6 of 16
To check the microfiber removal rate of the laundry filter, the difference before and after
passing through the laundry filter was determined in the form of the following formula:
MP removal rate (%) = Input MPs
  ea
L

− Output MPs
  ea
L

Input MPs
  ea
L
 × 100 (1)
2.2.2. Chemical Oxygen Demand Analytical Method
Chemical oxygen demand, called COD, was measured before and after passing
through the laundry filter to confirm the organic matter removal rate of the laundry filter.
COD is used as an indicator to determine the amount of dissolved oxygen needed to oxidize
organic matter in water with an oxidizing agent [23,24]. The COD manganese method was
used to check how much COD the laundry water filter removes. The COD manganese
method is a method of measuring the amount of oxygen consumed by adding 0.025 N
potassium permanganate to a wash water sample, heating it in a water bath for 30 min,
and then checking the amount of potassium permanganate consumed. The COD removal
rate was confirmed by measuring the difference in COD between the laundry discharge
water before and after passing through the filter. The removal rate was determined in the
form of the following formula:
COD removal rate (%) = Input COD
  mg
L

− Output COD
  mg
L

Input COD
  mg
L
 × 100 (2)
2.2.3. Suspended Solid Analytical Method
Suspended solid, called SS, was measured before and after passing through the de-
veloped laundry filter to confirm the total suspended solid removal rate of the developed
filter. SS is used as an indicator to check suspended solids in water [25]. SS was used as an
indicator to check how efficient the filter is in removing microplastics and other floating
pollutants. The measurement method used was to shake 1 L of laundry discharge water
using a glass fiber filter and then filter 250 mL of water using a vacuum pump to check the
weight difference in the glass fiber filter before and after the experiment. The difference
was confirmed by measuring the laundry discharge water before and after passing through
the filter to check the SS removal rate of the laundry wastewater filter. The removal rate
was determined in the form of the following formula:
SS removal rate (%) = Input SS
  mg
L

− Output SS
  mg
L

Input SS
  mg
L
 × 100 (3)
2.2.4. Turbidity Analytical Method
The difference in turbidity before and after the laundry filter was checked to confirm
the turbidity removal rate of the developed laundry filter. The turbidity was measured
using a turbidity meter (2100Q, HACH, Hach company, Loveland, CO, USA). The turbidity
removal rate was calculated by using the difference before and after passing through the
laundry filter in the form of the following formula:
Turbidity removal rate (%) = Input turbidity (NTU ) − Output tubidity (NTU )
Input turbidity (NTU ) × 100 (4)
3. Results
Microplastics, COD, and SS were analyzed, and the results were derived to evaluate
the effect and efficiency of the microplastic filter on the number of laundry cycles. The unit
of microplastics was expressed as MPs ea/L, the units of COD and SS were calculated as\n\n--- PAGE 7 ---\nWater 2025, 17, 358 7 of 16
mg/L, and the unit of turbidity was NTU. The process of the laundry machine consists of
the first washing, first rinsing, second rinsing, and dehydration process, and the analysis
of microplastics, COD, and SS was performed on the effluent after the first washing. The
removal rates of all analyzed pollutants were calculated before and after passing through
the developed filter. Additionally, the developed filter was not cleaned or replaced for
50 washes.
3.1. Microplastic Analysis
The experiment on microplastics in laundry wastewater was conducted 50 times with
5 kg/load of laundry after installing the developed filter at the rear of the washing machine.
The results are shown in Figure 5.
Water 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 18 
 
 
the microplastic ﬁlter can remove more than 90% of microplastics even when used with-
out any maintenance for 50 washes. According to a survey on washing machines, it was 
conﬁrmed that 67% of people in the world use washing machines twice a week on average 
[26]. The microplastic ﬁlter developed based on this was con ﬁrmed to have the perfor-
mance to remove microplastics regardless of ﬁlter replacement when used for 25 weeks 
(approximately 6 months). Therefore, the ﬁlter replacement cycle is 1 time per 6 months 
when using the washing machine twice a week, and 2 times per year when using the 
washing machine three times a week with a replacement cycle of about 4 months. The 
types of microplastics in the washing machine were inferred by checking the types of mi-
croplastics in the eﬄuent after the washing machine ﬁlter, as there were too many micro-
plastics in the eﬄuent before the ﬁltration. The types of microplastics were con ﬁrmed to 
be PE 57%, PET 9%, PA 9%, PU 8%, PP 8%, PPMA 6%, and PAN 3% at an average of 50 
times, as shown in Figure 7. The result can be inferred to be the most commonly used ﬁber 
material and the most commonly included ﬁber in clothing. In addition, PET, PA, and PU 
materials are also widely used as synthetic ﬁbers in clothing. Figure 8 shows photos of 
discharged microplastics during washing take n with a digital microscope. As shown in 
the microscope photos, a signi ﬁcant number of microplastics in the washing water were 
ﬁlament-shaped. 
 
Figure 5. Amount of microplastics by number of washes. 
Figure 5. Amount of microplastics by number of washes.
The maximum microplastics flowing into the wash wastewater was 1235 MPs ea/L,
the minimum was 652 MPs ea/L, and the average was 954 MPs ea/L. These numbers were
significantly different with each wash. The maximum microplastics flowing out through
the developed wash filter was 48 MPs ea/L, the minimum was 8 MPs ea/L, and the average
was 24 MPs ea/L. This result confirmed that there was a constant filter efficiency regardless
of the number of microplastics before the filtration of laundry wastewater. The microplastic
removal rate was confirmed by using Equation (1) to determine the number of microplastics
before and after the filtration. The microplastic removal rate was calculated to be 97%
on average.
In Figure 5, the number of microplastics detected in the wash wastewater passing
through the microplastic filter slightly increased as the number of washes increased. After
filtering 28 times, more than 23 MPs ea/L of microplastics were detected in the discharge
water. The maximum number of microplastics was 48 MPs ea/L, which was confirmed to
be more than 5 times higher than the minimum of 8 MPs ea/L. However, the microplastic
removal rate was still more than 93% when compared to the inflow water. The result
indicates that the efficiency of the washing filter does not have a large effect on the mi-
croplastic removal rate even for 50 washes. As shown in Figure 6, the removal rate of
microplastics was confirmed to be a maximum of 99% and a minimum of 93%. This means
that the microplastic filter can remove more than 90% of microplastics even when used
without any maintenance for 50 washes. According to a survey on washing machines,
it was confirmed that 67% of people in the world use washing machines twice a week
on average [26]. The microplastic filter developed based on this was confirmed to have\n\n--- PAGE 8 ---\nWater 2025, 17, 358 8 of 16
the performance to remove microplastics regardless of filter replacement when used for
25 weeks (approximately 6 months). Therefore, the filter replacement cycle is 1 time per
6 months when using the washing machine twice a week, and 2 times per year when
using the washing machine three times a week with a replacement cycle of about 4 months.
The types of microplastics in the washing machine were inferred by checking the types
of microplastics in the effluent after the washing machine filter, as there were too many
microplastics in the effluent before the filtration. The types of microplastics were confirmed
to be PE 57%, PET 9%, PA 9%, PU 8%, PP 8%, PPMA 6%, and PAN 3% at an average of
50 times, as shown in Figure 7. The result can be inferred to be the most commonly used
fiber material and the most commonly included fiber in clothing. In addition, PET, PA, and
PU materials are also widely used as synthetic fibers in clothing. Figure 8 shows photos of
discharged microplastics during washing taken with a digital microscope. As shown in
the microscope photos, a significant number of microplastics in the washing water were
filament-shaped.
Water 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Removal rate of microplastics by number of washes. 
 
Figure 7. Types of microplastics. 
Figure 6. Removal rate of microplastics by number of washes.
Water 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Removal rate of microplastics by number of washes. 
 
Figure 7. Types of microplastics. 
Figure 7. Types of microplastics.\n\n--- PAGE 9 ---\nWater 2025, 17, 358 9 of 16
Water 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Photos of microplastics in laundry wastewater using digital microscope. 
3.2. Chemical Oxygen Demend Analysis 
High COD in laundry wastewater can be a cause of river pollution and can overload 
wastewater treatment plants [27]. Therefore, COD removal from laundry eﬄuent can play 
many roles, such as reducing the level of pollution in wastewater from sewage treatment 
plants, reducing the use of water treatment chemicals in sewage treatment plants, and 
reducing wastewater load. 
During the 50 experiments, the COD of the washing water ﬂowing out before using 
the ﬁlter was conﬁrmed to be a maximum of 335 mg/L , a minimum of 119 mg/L, and an 
average of 296 mg/L, which was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for each wash in Figure 9. The COD 
of the washing wastewater ﬂowing out after the microplastic ﬁlter was conﬁrmed to be a 
maximum of 33 mg/L, a minimu m of 13 mg/L, and an average of 25 mg/L, and it was 
conﬁrmed not to be changed much. The COD removal e ﬃciency of the developed ﬁlter 
was conﬁrmed to be an average of 92%. 
Figure 8. Photos of microplastics in laundry wastewater using digital microscope.
3.2. Chemical Oxygen Demend Analysis
High COD in laundry wastewater can be a cause of river pollution and can overload
wastewater treatment plants [27]. Therefore, COD removal from laundry effluent can play
many roles, such as reducing the level of pollution in wastewater from sewage treatment
plants, reducing the use of water treatment chemicals in sewage treatment plants, and
reducing wastewater load.
During the 50 experiments, the COD of the washing water flowing out before using
the filter was confirmed to be a maximum of 335 mg/L, a minimum of 119 mg/L, and an
average of 296 mg/L, which was significantly different for each wash in Figure 9. The COD
of the washing wastewater flowing out after the microplastic filter was confirmed to be a
maximum of 33 mg/L, a minimum of 13 mg/L, and an average of 25 mg/L, and it was
confirmed not to be changed much. The COD removal efficiency of the developed filter
was confirmed to be an average of 92%.
Water 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Amount of COD by number of washes. 
Figure 10 shows that the COD removal eﬃciency decreases slightly as the number of 
washes increases. However, it was determined that the COD removal e ﬃciency remains 
above 87% even after 50 washes. 
 
Figure 10. Removal rate of COD by number of washes. 
A large amount of water is used as laundry wastewater. It is expected that the COD 
of contaminated water can be reduced by an average of 90% or more when using the cur-
rently developed laundry ﬁlter, which will reduce the load on sewage treatment plants 
for laundry wastewater by approximately 90%. 
3.3. Suspended Soild Analysis 
SS of laundry wastewater is composed of  organic and inorganic substances. SS can 
be used as a tool to easily check water quality pollution of laundry wastewater. 
In Figure 11, the SS before the ﬁlter of the laundry discharge water after 50 experi-
ments was conﬁrmed to have a large ﬂuctuation, with a maximum of 151 mg/L, a mini-
mum of 79 mg/L, and an average of 110 mg/L. The SS of the laundry discharge water after 
ﬁltration through the developed ﬁlter was con ﬁrmed to have high removal e ﬃciencies, 
Figure 9. Amount of COD by number of washes.
Figure 10 shows that the COD removal efficiency decreases slightly as the number of
washes increases. However, it was determined that the COD removal efficiency remains
above 87% even after 50 washes.\n\n--- PAGE 10 ---\nWater 2025, 17, 358 10 of 16
Water 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Amount of COD by number of washes. 
Figure 10 shows that the COD removal eﬃciency decreases slightly as the number of 
washes increases. However, it was determined that the COD removal e ﬃciency remains 
above 87% even after 50 washes. 
 
Figure 10. Removal rate of COD by number of washes. 
A large amount of water is used as laundry wastewater. It is expected that the COD 
of contaminated water can be reduced by an average of 90% or more when using the cur-
rently developed laundry ﬁlter, which will reduce the load on sewage treatment plants 
for laundry wastewater by approximately 90%. 
3.3. Suspended Soild Analysis 
SS of laundry wastewater is composed of  organic and inorganic substances. SS can 
be used as a tool to easily check water quality pollution of laundry wastewater. 
In Figure 11, the SS before the ﬁlter of the laundry discharge water after 50 experi-
ments was conﬁrmed to have a large ﬂuctuation, with a maximum of 151 mg/L, a mini-
mum of 79 mg/L, and an average of 110 mg/L. The SS of the laundry discharge water after 
ﬁltration through the developed ﬁlter was con ﬁrmed to have high removal e ﬃciencies, 
Figure 10. Removal rate of COD by number of washes.
A large amount of water is used as laundry wastewater. It is expected that the COD of
contaminated water can be reduced by an average of 90% or more when using the currently
developed laundry filter, which will reduce the load on sewage treatment plants for laundry
wastewater by approximately 90%.
3.3. Suspended Soild Analysis
SS of laundry wastewater is composed of organic and inorganic substances. SS can be
used as a tool to easily check water quality pollution of laundry wastewater.
In Figure 11, the SS before the filter of the laundry discharge water after 50 experiments
was confirmed to have a large fluctuation, with a maximum of 151 mg/L, a minimum
of 79 mg/L, and an average of 110 mg/L. The SS of the laundry discharge water after
filtration through the developed filter was confirmed to have high removal efficiencies, with
a maximum of 21 mg/L, a minimum of 2 mg/L, and an average of 12 mg/L. Accordingly,
the SS removal efficiency using Equation (3) was determined and was shown in Figure 12.
The SS removal rate after using the laundry filter was confirmed to be high, with an average
of 89%. It was confirmed that the SS removal efficiency was maintained at a high level
of over 80% even after using the developed laundry filter more than 50 times. This is a
technology that can reduce the SS of laundry wastewater by 80%, which can reduce the
amount of coagulant used in sewage treatment plants.
Water 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 18 
 
 
with a maximum of 21 mg/L, a minimum of 2 mg/L, and an average of 12 mg/L. Accord-
ingly, the SS removal e ﬃciency using Equation (3) was determined and was shown in 
Figure 12. The SS removal ra te after using the laundry ﬁlter was con ﬁrmed to be high, 
with an average of 89%. It was con ﬁrmed that the SS removal e ﬃciency was maintained 
at a high level of over 80% even after using the developed laundry ﬁlter more than 50 
times. This is a technology th at can reduce the SS of laundry wastewater by 80%, which 
can reduce the amount of coagulant used in sewage treatment plants. 
 
Figure 11. Amount of SS by number of washes. 
 
Figure 12. Removal rate of SS by number of washes. 
3.4. Turbidity Analysis 
Turbidity is a basic standard that can be used to simply measure water quality by 
checking the degree of turbidity of a liquid. As a result of 50 experiments, the turbidity of 
the wash water before using the ﬁlter was conﬁrmed to be a maximum of 98 NTU, a min-
imum of 62 NTU, and an average of 84 NTU, with a maximum di ﬀerence of 36 NTU, as 
shown in Figure 13. The turbidity of the laundry discharge water after the ﬁlter was con-
ﬁrmed to be a maximum of 17 NTU, a minimum of 2 NTU, and an average of 10 NTU, 
Figure 11. Amount of SS by number of washes.\n\n--- PAGE 11 ---\nWater 2025, 17, 358 11 of 16
Water 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 18 
 
 
with a maximum of 21 mg/L, a minimum of 2 mg/L, and an average of 12 mg/L. Accord-
ingly, the SS removal e ﬃciency using Equation (3) was determined and was shown in 
Figure 12. The SS removal ra te after using the laundry ﬁlter was con ﬁrmed to be high, 
with an average of 89%. It was con ﬁrmed that the SS removal e ﬃciency was maintained 
at a high level of over 80% even after using the developed laundry ﬁlter more than 50 
times. This is a technology th at can reduce the SS of laundry wastewater by 80%, which 
can reduce the amount of coagulant used in sewage treatment plants. 
 
Figure 11. Amount of SS by number of washes. 
 
Figure 12. Removal rate of SS by number of washes. 
3.4. Turbidity Analysis 
Turbidity is a basic standard that can be used to simply measure water quality by 
checking the degree of turbidity of a liquid. As a result of 50 experiments, the turbidity of 
the wash water before using the ﬁlter was conﬁrmed to be a maximum of 98 NTU, a min-
imum of 62 NTU, and an average of 84 NTU, with a maximum di ﬀerence of 36 NTU, as 
shown in Figure 13. The turbidity of the laundry discharge water after the ﬁlter was con-
ﬁrmed to be a maximum of 17 NTU, a minimum of 2 NTU, and an average of 10 NTU, 
Figure 12. Removal rate of SS by number of washes.
3.4. Turbidity Analysis
Turbidity is a basic standard that can be used to simply measure water quality by
checking the degree of turbidity of a liquid. As a result of 50 experiments, the turbidity
of the wash water before using the filter was confirmed to be a maximum of 98 NTU, a
minimum of 62 NTU, and an average of 84 NTU, with a maximum difference of 36 NTU,
as shown in Figure 13. The turbidity of the laundry discharge water after the filter was
confirmed to be a maximum of 17 NTU, a minimum of 2 NTU, and an average of 10 NTU,
with a maximum difference of 15 NTU. Accordingly, by applying Equation (4), the turbidity
removal efficiency was confirmed to be an average of 88%.
Water 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 18 
 
 
with a maximum di ﬀerence of 15 NTU. Accordingly, by applying Equation (4), the tur-
bidity removal eﬃciency was conﬁrmed to be an average of 88%. 
In Figure 14, the turbidity removal rate began to fall below 90% in the 25th cycle and 
showed a removal e ﬃciency of 81% in the 50th cycle. The highest SS removal e ﬃciency 
was 97% in the 2nd cycle, and the minimum e ﬃciency was con ﬁrmed to be 81% in the 
39th cycle. The minimum eﬃciency of 81% can be considered high eﬃciency considering 
the SS concentration of the washing water go ing to the sewage treatment plant. Accord-
ingly, it was conﬁrmed that the turbidity removal of the ﬁlter maintained high eﬃciency 
even after 50 test cycles. 
 
Figure 13. Amount of turbidity by number of washes. 
 
Figure 14. Removal rate of turbidity by number of washes. 
4. Discussion 
In this experiment, the average amount of  microplastics generated during laundry 
was conﬁrmed to be 954 MPs ea/L based on 5 kg/1 load. These microplastics enter sewage 
treatment plants and are not completely removed, so they are released into rivers and the 
sea. According to J Ba yo. 2023, the microplastic removal e ﬃciency of sewage treatment 
plants was con ﬁrmed to be at least 64.3% to 89.2% [28]. Despite these treatments, 93 
Figure 13. Amount of turbidity by number of washes.
In Figure 14, the turbidity removal rate began to fall below 90% in the 25th cycle and
showed a removal efficiency of 81% in the 50th cycle. The highest SS removal efficiency
was 97% in the 2nd cycle, and the minimum efficiency was confirmed to be 81% in the 39th
cycle. The minimum efficiency of 81% can be considered high efficiency considering the SS
concentration of the washing water going to the sewage treatment plant. Accordingly, it
was confirmed that the turbidity removal of the filter maintained high efficiency even after
50 test cycles.\n\n--- PAGE 12 ---\nWater 2025, 17, 358 12 of 16
Water 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 18 
 
 
with a maximum di ﬀerence of 15 NTU. Accordingly, by applying Equation (4), the tur-
bidity removal eﬃciency was conﬁrmed to be an average of 88%. 
In Figure 14, the turbidity removal rate began to fall below 90% in the 25th cycle and 
showed a removal e ﬃciency of 81% in the 50th cycle. The highest SS removal e ﬃciency 
was 97% in the 2nd cycle, and the minimum e ﬃciency was con ﬁrmed to be 81% in the 
39th cycle. The minimum eﬃciency of 81% can be considered high eﬃciency considering 
the SS concentration of the washing water go ing to the sewage treatment plant. Accord-
ingly, it was conﬁrmed that the turbidity removal of the ﬁlter maintained high eﬃciency 
even after 50 test cycles. 
 
Figure 13. Amount of turbidity by number of washes. 
 
Figure 14. Removal rate of turbidity by number of washes. 
4. Discussion 
In this experiment, the average amount of  microplastics generated during laundry 
was conﬁrmed to be 954 MPs ea/L based on 5 kg/1 load. These microplastics enter sewage 
treatment plants and are not completely removed, so they are released into rivers and the 
sea. According to J Ba yo. 2023, the microplastic removal e ﬃciency of sewage treatment 
plants was con ﬁrmed to be at least 64.3% to 89.2% [28]. Despite these treatments, 93 
Figure 14. Removal rate of turbidity by number of washes.
4. Discussion
In this experiment, the average amount of microplastics generated during laundry
was confirmed to be 954 MPs ea/L based on 5 kg/1 load. These microplastics enter sewage
treatment plants and are not completely removed, so they are released into rivers and the
sea. According to J Ba yo. 2023, the microplastic removal efficiency of sewage treatment
plants was confirmed to be at least 64.3% to 89.2% [28]. Despite these treatments, 93 million
and 8.2 billion microplastics are released into the ocean, rivers, and seas [29]. Household
laundry water contains many water pollutants such as surfactants, organic dyes, nitrogen,
phosphorus, alkalis, bleach, pathogens, and microplastics [30]. These components increase
the wastewater pollution load on sewage treatment plants and increase treatment costs.
Accordingly, minimal contamination of laundry wastewater is an important factor.
Most household microplastics come from laundry wastewater. Washing water ac-
counts for 15 to 20% of the water used in households [ 31]. The total amount of laundry
wastewater discharged annually in China is about 10.71 billion tons [32]. The European
Union, EU, industrial laundry sector washes 2.7 billion kg of textiles per year (wet weight)
and uses 42 million m 3 of water, which ends up in sewage as wastewater [ 33]. Accord-
ingly, in this study, we developed a washing machine microplastic filter and conducted
50 experiments at 5 kg/load using an actual washing machine. The developed washing wa-
ter microplastic removal filter showed a high microplastic removal rate of 97% on average.
These results are higher than the capture rate of 89% of microfibers by Filtrol 160 (Wexco
Environmental, MN, USA) using a commercially available 100 µm polyester mesh [16] and
higher than the capture rate of up to 87% by the developed washing machine filter [15,34].
In this experiment, we additionally confirmed COD, SS, and turbidity in the wash
wastewater, which were not confirmed in the existing microfiber filter experiments. The
wash wastewater passing through the developed microplastic filter showed an average
removal rate of 91% for COD, 89% for SS, and 88% for turbidity. This is a very high
treatment rate, confirming that it can reduce the direct load on wastewater pollutants in
sewage treatment plants. In addition, we verified the sustainability of the efficiency of the
wash filter by conducting the experiment at 5 kg/load for 50 times. Although the treatment
rate decreased slightly as the number of operations increased, we were able to confirm an
average treatment rate of over 88% for all pollutants.
Based on the results of this experiment, the significance probabilities of microplastics
and COD, SS, and turbidity were confirmed. The probability value (p-value) according to
the number of microplastics discharged from the washing wastewater was confirmed to\n\n--- PAGE 13 ---\nWater 2025, 17, 358 13 of 16
be 0.038 for COD, 0.000 for SS, and 0.012 for turbidity. A p-value of 0.05 or less is reported
to have a significant correlation. Therefore, it was confirmed that COD, SS, and turbidity
were all correlated with the number of microplastic discharge. Among them, the p-value of
SS was confirmed to have the highest correlation with microplastics at 0.000, and COD was
confirmed to have the lowest correlation at 0.038, as shown in Figure 15.
Water 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 18 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
Figure 15. Correlation between microplastics and water pollutants: (a) COD vs. MPs; (b) SS vs. MPs;
(c) turbidity vs. MPs.\n\n--- PAGE 14 ---\nWater 2025, 17, 358 14 of 16
Through this study, we were able to confirm that when using the developed filter,
not only microplastics but also water pollutants such as COD, SS, and turbidity were
effectively removed.
In order to commercialize the developed filter, various methods are being explored
to check the flow reduction, clogging problems, and maintenance requirements. The flow
reduction will be minimized by adjusting the filter hole size to remove particles by size.
The clogging problem will be solved by adding a pretreatment filter with large holes in the
initial stage of large fibers or debris, and a maintenance manual that allows for periodic
cleaning of the filter will be created and reflected. For easier maintenance, the design of the
filter is being changed to make it easy to clean or replace, and a notification system that
notifies the user when the filter needs to be cleaned or replaced is also being considered.
5. Conclusions
In this study, the removal rate of microplastics and the removal characteristics of COD,
SS, and turbidity of the developed laundry filter were investigated. The pollutant removal
efficiency of the microplastic filter was confirmed with a total of 50 time tests at 5 kg/load,
and the results have the following findings:
1. A microplastic removal filter exclusively for washing machines with a four-stage
filtration system was developed. The developed filter is installed in a domestic sewer and
connected to the washing machine.
2. The removal rate of microplastics using the microplastic filter is a high efficiency of
98.5% on average during 50 washes, and the filter can be used for 4 to 6 months without
maintenance.
3. The possibility of the microplastic filter removing various water pollutants as well
as microplastics was confirmed by COD average removal of 92%, SS average removal of
80%, and turbidity average removal of 88%.
4. The installation of the developed filter for washing discharge water can remove
many water pollutants, so it is an important factor in reducing the water pollution load of
sewage treatment plants.
5. Microplastics in laundry water and SS have a high correlation of p-value at 0.000.
These results confirm that there is one way to reduce microplastics caused by laundry
discharge water, which accounts for 35% of ocean pollution. The laundry wastewater filter
can have a significant reduction on the water quality pollution load of sewage treatment
plants. However, legislation, innovation, and awareness changes to regulate microplastics
are needed to implement the developed filters. In addition, the development of an industry-
use microplastic filter is also an urgent issue and could help prevent marine pollution
by microplastics.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.P . and B.P .; methodology, B.P . and H.-J.Y.; software,
B.P .; validation, B.P ., H.-J.Y. and H.P .; analysis, B.P . and H.-J.Y.; data collection, B.P . and H.-J.Y.;
writing—original draft preparation, B.P . and H.-J.Y.; writing—review and editing, H.P .; supervision,
H.P .; project administration, H.P .; funding acquisition, H.P . All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the Korea Technology and Information Promotion Agency,
grant number RS-2023-00256359.
Data Availability Statement: Data are contained within the article.
Conflicts of Interest: Authors Beomseok Park and Hanbai Park were employed by the company
Korea Microplastic Research Center Co., Ltd. Author Hee-Jung Yoon was employed by the company
Taeyoungunion Co., Ltd. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the\n\n--- PAGE 15 ---\nWater 2025, 17, 358 15 of 16
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict
of interest.
References
1. Boucher, J.; Friot, D. Primary Microplastics in the Oceans: A Global Evaluation of Sources; IUCN: Gland, Switzerland, 2017; p. 43.
2. Murphy, F.; Ewins, C.; Carbonnier, F.; Quinn, B. Wastewater treatment works (wwtw) as a source of microplastics in the aquatic
environment. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2016, 50, 5800–5808. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Franco, A.A.; Arellano, J.M.; Albendín, G.; Rodríguez-barroso, R.; Quiroga, J.M.; Coello, M.D. Science of the total environment
microplastic pollution in wastewater treatment plants in the city of Cádiz: Abundance, removal efficiency and presence in
receiving water body. Sci. Total Environ. 2021, 776, 145795. [CrossRef]
4. Conley, K.; Clum, A.; Deepe, J.; Lane, H.; Beckingham, B. Wastewater treatment plants as a source of microplastics to an urban
estuary: Removal efficiencies and loading per capita over one year. Water Res. X 2019, 3, 100030. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Yang, L.; Qiao, F.; Lei, K.; Li, H.; Kang, Y.; Cui, S.; An, L. Microfiber release from different fabrics during washing.Environ. Pollut.
2019, 249, 136–143. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Cesa, F.S.; Turra, A.; Checon, H.H.; Leonardi, B.; Baruque-ramos, J. Laundering and textile parameters influence fibers release in
household washings. Environ. Pollut. 2019, 257, 113553. [CrossRef]
7. De Falco, F.; Di Pace, E.; Cocca, M.; Avella, M. The contribution of washing processes of synthetic clothes to microplastic pollution.
Sci. Rep. 2019, 9, 1–11. [CrossRef]
8. Hernandez, E.; Nowack, B.; Mitrano, D.M. Polyester Textiles as a Source of Microplastics from Households: A Mechanistic Study
to Understand Microfiber Release during Washing. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2017, 51, 7036–7046. [CrossRef]
9. Cotton, L.; Hayward, A.S.; Lant, N.J.; Blackburn, R.S. Improved garment longevity and reduced microfibre release are important
sustainability benefits of laundering in colder and quicker washing machine cycles. Dye. Pigment. 2020, 177, 108120. [CrossRef]
10. Hartline, N.L.; Bruce, N.J.; Karba, S.N.; Ru, E.O.; Sonar, S.U.; Holden, P .A. Microfiber masses recovered from conventional
machine washing of new or aged garments. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2016, 50, 11532–11538. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. Julapong, P .; Srichonphaisarn, P .; Meekoch, T.; Tabelin, C.B.; Juntarasakul, O.; Phengsaart, T. The Influence of Textile Type, Textile
Weight, and Detergent Dosage on Microfiber Emissions from Top-Loading Washing Machines.Toxics 2024, 12, 210. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
12. Volgare, M.; De Falco, F.; Avolio, R.; Castaldo, R.; Errico, M.E.; Gentile, G.; Ambrogi, V .; Cocca, M. Washing load influences the
microplastic release from polyester fabrics by affecting wettability and mechanical stress. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 19479. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
13. Periyasamy, A. Evaluation of microfiber release from jeans: The impact of different washing conditions. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res.
2021, 28, 58570–58582. [CrossRef]
14. Lim, J.; Choi, J.; Won, A.; Kim, M.; Kim, S.; Yun, C. Cause of microfibers found in the domestic washing process of clothing;
focusing on the manufacturing, wearing, and washing processes. Fash. Text. 2022, 9, 24. [CrossRef]
15. McIlwraith, H.K.; Lin, J.; Erdle, L.M.; Mallos, N.; Diamond, M.L.; Rochman, C.M. Capturing microfibers—Marketed technologies
reduce microfiber emissions from washing machines. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 2019, 139, 40–45. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Erdle, L.M.; Nouri Parto, D.; Sweetnam, D.; Rochman, C.M. Washing Machine Filters Reduce Microfiber Emissions: Evidence
from a Community-Scale Pilot in Parry Sound, Ontario. Front. Mar. Sci. 2021, 8, 777865. [CrossRef]
17. Osman, A.I.; Hosny, M.; Eltaweil, A.S.; Omar, S.; Elgarahy, A.M.; Farghali, M.; Yap, P .-S.; Wu, Y.-S.; Nagandran, S.; Batumalaie, K.;
et al. Microplastic sources, formation, toxicity and remediation: A review. Environ. Chem. Lett. 2023, 21, 2129–2169. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
18. Ahmed, S.F.; Islam, N.; Tasannum, N.; Mehjabin, A.; Momtahin, A.; Chowdhury, A.A.; Almomani, F.; Mofijur, M. Microplastic
removal and management strategies for wastewater treatment plants. Chemosphere 2024, 347, 140648. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19. Tang, K.H.D.; Hadibarata, T. Microplastics removal through water treatment plants: Its feasibility, efficiency, future prospects and
enhancement by proper waste management. Environ. Chall. 2021, 5, 100264. [CrossRef]
20. Na, S.H.; Kim, M.J.; Kim, J.T.; Jeong, S.; Lee, S.; Chung, J.; Kim, E.J. Microplastic removal in conventional drinking water treatment
processes: Performance, mechanism, and potential risk. Water Res. 2021, 202, 117417. [CrossRef]
21. Talvitie, J.; Mikola, A.; Koistinen, A.; Setälä, O. Solutions to microplastic pollution—Removal of microplastics from wastewater
effluent with advanced wastewater treatment technologies. Water Res. 2017, 123, 401–407. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Schnepf, U.; von Moers-Meßmer, M.; Brümmer, F. A practical primer for image-based particle measurements in microplastic
research. Micropl. Nanopl. 2023, 3, 16. [CrossRef]
23. APHA. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, 22nd ed.; American Public Health Association: Washington
DC, USA, 2012.\n\n--- PAGE 16 ---\nWater 2025, 17, 358 16 of 16
24. Dubber, D.; Gray, N.F. Replacement of chemical oxygen demand (COD) with total organic carbon (TOC) for monitoring
wastewater treatment performance to minimize disposal of toxic analytical waste. J. Environ. Sci. Health A Tox Hazard. Subst.
Environ. Eng. 2010, 45, 1595–1600. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Bilotta, G.S.; Brazier, R.E. Understanding the influence of suspended solids on water quality and aquatic biota. Water Res. 2008,
42, 2849–2861. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Tomorrow’s World Today Home Page. Available online: https://www.tomorrowsworldtoday.com/sustainability/laundry-
around-the-world/ (accessed on 8 July 2024).
27. Jayanto, G.D.; Widyastuti, M.; Hadi, P . Laundry wastewater characteristics and their relationship with river water quality as an
indicator of water pollution. Case study: Code Watershed, Yogyakarta. E3S Web Conf. 2021, 325, 02011. [CrossRef]
28. Bayo, J.; López-Castellanos, J.; Olmos, S.; Rojo, D. Characterization and removal efficiencies of microplastics discharged from
sewage treatment plants in Southeast Spain. Water Res. 2023, 244, 120479. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. OSPAR Commision. Assessment Document of Land-Based Inputs of Microplastics in the Marine Environment. 2017. Available online:
https://www.ospar.org/documents?v=38018 (accessed on 20 July 2024).
30. Goel, G.; Kaur, S. A Study on Chemical Contamination of Water Due to Household Laundry Detergents.J. Hum. Ecol. 2012, 38,
65–69. [CrossRef]
31. Almulhim, A.I.; Aina, Y.A. Understanding Household Water-Use Behavior and Consumption Patterns during COVID-19
Lockdown in Saudi Arabia. Water 2022, 14, 314. [CrossRef]
32. Manouchehri, M.; Kargari, A. Water recovery from laundry wastewater by the cross flow microfiltration process: A strategy for
water recycling in residential buildings. J. Clean. Prod. 2017, 168, 227–238. [CrossRef]
33. van de Belgische Textielverzorging, F. Sustainable Measures for Industrial Laundry Expansion Strategies: SMART LAUNDRY-
2015, CORDIS EU Research Results, 2015, 1. Available online: https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/217809/es (accessed on 13
July 2024).
34. Napper, I.E.; Thompson, R.C. Release of synthetic microplastic plastic fibres from domestic washing machines: Effects of fabric
type and washing conditions. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 2016, 112, 39–45. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.