===== PDF PAGE 1 =====
npj | emerging contaminants Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44454-025-00020-2
A self-cleaning, bio-inspired high
retention ﬁlter for a major entry path
of microplastics
Check for updates
Leandra Hamann 1 , Christian Reuß1,2, Hendrik Herzog 1,K r i s t i n aS c h r e i b e r1,3,
Christian Geitner 4 & Alexander Blanke 1
Microplastic (MP) ﬁbres from washing machines are a major source of environmental pollution, yet,
existing domestic ﬁltration solutions are prone to clogging and have limited retention. Inspired by the
gill arch system of ram-feedingﬁshes, we developed a bio-inspiredﬁlter that employs semi-cross-ﬂow
ﬁltration with a conicalﬁlter element geometry, periodic self-cleaning and optimised inﬂow. Laboratory
tests show that theﬁsh-inspired ﬁlter (FiF) retains up to 99.6% of MP testﬁbres. Clogging is reduced by
collecting up to 85% of the ﬁbres outside the FiF through a periodic cleaning mechanism. CFD and
ﬂow tank experiments demonstrate that ﬁltration performance is strongly in ﬂuenced by the angle of
attack and inlet geometry. The FiF achieves a low concentrate volume ( ∼5%), increasing yield and
minimising post-treatment. Our ﬁndings highlight the potential of bio-inspired ﬁltration mechanisms
for engineering applications such as washing machines requiring high ef ﬁciency and modular design.
Microplastics (MPs), plastic particles and ﬁbres smaller than 5 mm, are
ubiquitous pollutants found in water1,s o i l2 and air3. In all these environ-
ments, MPs have adverse effects, for example, they accumulate fungal
pathogens in soil
4, cause phytotoxicity on vascular plants5, enter marine top
predators through trophic transfer6, and induce oxidative stress, in ﬂam-
mation, and metabolic disorders in humans 7. It is widely acknowledged
that a diverse combination of mitigation strategies is necessary to reduce
MPs from entering the environment. Long-term strategies include shifting
to a circular economy, developing new materials and sustainable products,
and conducting educational work to change societal mindset
8–10.S h o r t -
term measures include, for example, legislation to ban MPs in cosmetics,
the use of substitute materials, or cleaning activities 11,12. Filtration is
another short-term means to reduce MPs close to their sources and entry
points, but current ﬁltration solutions are hindered by low retention efﬁ-
ciencies for MPs, as well as rapid clogging.
Washing machines are a major entry path for MPs, releasing between 10
and 120 g of MP ﬁbres from textiles per person per year, and are one of the
major MP sources
13–15. Washing machines have coarseﬁlters to protect the
pump by retaining stones or coins, but no MP ﬁlter16. Hence, MPs are
brought unﬁltered into the sewage system. Wastewater treatment plants
equipped with secondary and tertiary treatment stages retain 84 –94% of
MPs17. However, retained MPs accumulate in the sewage sludge, with
63–90% coming from washing machines17. The MPs are then reintroduced
i n t ot h ee n v i r o n m e n tw h e nt h es e w a g es l u d g ei sd i s p o s e do fo na g r i c u l t u r a l
ﬁe l d s ,a si sc o m m o np r a c t i c eg l o b a l l y17,18. Therefore, despite the high reten-
tion rates within wastewater treatment plants, intercepting MPs before they
reach the sewage system is a critical and underdeveloped intervention point.
We present a biomimetic,ﬁsh-inspiredﬁlter (FiF) with high ﬁltration
efﬁciency of standardised MP ﬁbres and a self-cleaning process. Our ﬁlter
module is based on the ﬁlter-feeding process in ram-feedingﬁshes because
aspects of thisﬁltration process, in principle,ﬁts some of the requirements in
w a s h i n gm a c h i n e ss u c ha sp a r t i c l es i z e ,ﬂow regime, andﬁlter size (Supple-
mentary Note 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1). Ram-feedingﬁshes are pelagic
ﬁshes that use their forward motion to induce ﬂow through the gill arch
system
19,20. The gill arch system is composed of gill arches with elongated gill
rakers. The morphology of the gill arch system is species dependant with some
having denticles on the gill arches and gill rakers
19, while others produce
mucus to accumulate particles21, have surface structures that induce local
vortices to retain particles22 or use a combination thereof. In most ﬁlter-
feedingﬁshes, the gill arches form a cone-shaped geometry that tapers down
towards the oesophagus within the buccal cavity 19,23–25. While swimming
f o r w a r dw i t ha no p e nm o u t h ,at a n g e n t i a lﬂow transports the food particles
towards the oesophagus, and the cleared water exits between the gill arches
and under the operculum. This process was previously described as cross-ﬂow
ﬁltration with variations found in some species called cross-stepﬁltration
20,22.
Based on morphology and video analysis of their feeding behaviour19,i ti s
1Bonn Institute for Organismic Biology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. 2DSG-Canusa GmbH, Development Engineer, Rheinbach, Germany. 3Biomimetics
Group, Energy and Sustainability Research Institute, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. 4Fraunhofer Institute for Environmental Safety and
Energy Technology UMSICHT, Oberhausen, Germany. e-mail: hamannleandra@gmail.com
npj Emerging Contaminants |            (2025) 1:18 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

===== PDF PAGE 2 =====
likely that theﬁltration process in ram-feedingﬁsh like anchovy, pilchard, and
Atlantic mackerel, in fact, combines cross-ﬂow and dead-end ﬁltration. In
these ﬁshes, the gill rakers form a ﬂat surface that induce particles rolling
towards the oesophagus where they accumulate before being swallowed19.
Particle rolling is enabled by the conically tapered geometry of the gill arch
system. The geometry is described by an angle, the angle of attackα (Fig.1A),
and may range between 0°(dead-endﬁltration) and 90° (cross-ﬂow ﬁltration,
Fig. 1B). Therefore, the ﬁltration process was previously called semi-cross-
ﬂow ﬁltration19 (Fig. 1B). Our FiF mimics the functional morphology in
selected ram-ﬁlter-feedingﬁshes to take advantage of the semi-cross-ﬂow
ﬁltration process. Furthermore, by varying parameters likeﬁlter size, mesh
size or angle of attack in physical and numerical experiments, we demonstrate
that ﬁlter performance depends on speciﬁc parameter combinations and can
thus be tailored to a wide range of potential applications, including retention
o fM P si nw a s h i n gm a c h i n e s .O u rﬁsh-inspiredﬁl t e r( F i F )i su n i q u ei ni t s
combination of (i) a cone-shapedﬁlter element with aﬁlter medium at a set
angle of attackα to induce semi-cross-ﬂow ﬁltration, (ii) aﬁlter housing with
adapted inﬂow and separate permeate and concentrate outlet, and (iii) an
adjustable periodic cleaning mechanism that delays clogging.
Results
Effect of angle of attack on particle deposition during semi-
cross-ﬂow ﬁltration
The gill arch system inside the buccal c avity is tapered towards the oeso-
phagus, bilaterally symmetric, and consists of ﬁve gill arches that bear
elongated gill rakers with denticles forming a mesh (Fig.1A). In micro-CT
scans ofﬁve ram-feedingﬁshes, the angle of attackα was measured between
the hyoid bone and an extended line of the GR of the ﬁrst four arches in
virtual cross-sections of theﬁsh’sh e a d( F i g .1A). Across all ﬁve species, α
ranged between 4° for more anterior and 47° for more posterior gill arches
(Supplementary Fig. 2). Based on the semi-cross-ﬂow ﬁltration process19,
this would indicate that particles entering theﬁsh’sm o u t hw o u l de x p e r i e n c e
higher tangential forces at lowerα at the more anterior gill arches. Conse-
quently, particles would roll along the gill rakers and denticles so that they
accumulate close to the oesophagus due to higherα before being swallowed
(Fig. 1A, B). In order to test this hypothesis, we observed particle rolling on
ﬁlter meshes at α ranging from 0° to 60° under a range of other parameter
variations in a series of ﬂow tank experiments. We found that the share of
rolling MP and non-MP particles —with no ‘permanent’ deposition and
potential clogging of theﬁlter mesh- increases with lowerα, but the strength
of that effect varies with particle type and mesh size (Fig.1C). Round brine
shrimp eggs, a part of the natural food of ram-feedingﬁshes, keep rolling up
to an angle of 40° after which the probability to roll drops and reaches <30%
at 60°. Brine shrimp adults show a similarly high probability to roll at low
angles but a more linear decrease with higherα. The probability of rolling for
MP fragments decreases in a cubic relation and is generally lower than for
the natural particles. The probabilityof rolling is overall the smallest for the
MP ﬁbres compared to the other particle types. The probability of rolling
drops from 20% at 10° to 0% at 40° with the 53 μm mesh size and from 37.5%
at 10° to 0% at 50° with the 100 μm mesh size. With the 300 μm mesh size,
Fig. 1 | Interaction of particles with ﬁlter media at different angles of attack α.
A Volume render cross-section through th e frontal plane with view on the ventral
side of the buccal cavity of Micro-CT scans the Indian mackerel Rastrelliger
kanagurta . The blue arrow and blue line indicate the in ﬂow and midline of the ﬁsh,
and one side of α. The yellow, orange and red lines indicate the orientation of the
four gill arches (GA1-4) and the other side of α. B Schematic drawing of (i) dead-
end ﬁltration with α = 90°, (ii) semi-cross- ﬂow ﬁltration with α ranging between 0°
and 90°, and (iii) cross- ﬂow ﬁltration with α = 90°. Depending on in ﬂow and the α
of the ﬁlter medium, the tangential ﬂow induces particles to stop or roll along the
surface of the ﬁlter medium. C Probability of particles rolling after contact with the
ﬁlter medium for each α (10°–60°), particle type (Brine shrimp eggs, Brine shrimp
adults, MP fragments, MP ﬁbres), and mesh size (53, 100, 300 μm). Polynomial
regression, with y on x, was used to describe the in ﬂuence of α on the probability of
rolling. There are no results for the brine shrimp eggs and MP fragments because
the mesh size was too big to retain the smaller particles. D Boxplots of all R
2 of the
Boltzmann ﬁt to describe the motion of all four particle types. For more details of
particle characteristics and results of preliminary experiments, see Table 2 and
Supplementary Fig. 3.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44454-025-00020-2 Article
npj Emerging Contaminants |            (2025) 1:18 2

===== PDF PAGE 3 =====
the probability of rollingﬁrst increases from 50% at 10° to 70% at 20° and 30°
and then decreases to 20% at 60° (Fig.1C). Another difference between the
brine shrimp adults in comparison to the brine shrimp eggs and MPs is the
quality of the Boltzmann ﬁtt ot h ev e l o c i t yp r oﬁle of the particles when in
contact with the ﬁlter mesh (Supplementary Fig. 3). For the brine shrimp
adults,R² is 0.60 ± 0.34 whereas it is 0.95 ± 0.03, 0.97 ± 0.05, and 0.98 ± 0.06
for the brine shrimp eggs, MP fragments and MP ﬁbres, respectively
(Fig.1D). This indicates a different behaviour of the motile brine shrimp adults
in comparison to the other, non-motile particles. Hence, for MP retention, the
angle of attack should preferably be lower than 20° to keep the MPs in
suspension or rolling for longer and reduce clogging of theﬁlter medium.
Design of ﬁsh-inspired ﬁlter element
I no r d e rt od e s i g naﬁlter that separates particles based on semi-cross-ﬂow
ﬁltration, we mimicked the gill arch system morphology with the ﬁlter
element. The basic design of a ﬁlter element is radially symmetric and has
several arched support structures thatresemble the gill arches and can hold
commercially available and standardisedﬁlter meshes (Fig.2A, B). Theﬁlter
mesh creates a ﬂat ﬁlter medium as observed in the Atlantic herring, the
Atlantic pilchard, and the Atlantic anchovy formed by the gill rakers and
denticles (Fig. 2B). The ﬁlter element is described by an in ﬂow opening,
resembling the mouth, with diameterLM and an outﬂow opening, resam-
pling the oesophagus, with diameterLC and a ﬁlter length of LF (Fig. 2A).
Since LM > LC, the gill arches and the associated mesh decrease in diameter,
which results in the angle of attack,α.B yc h a n g i n gt h eﬁlter element length
or the opening diameter, α can be adjusted to lower or higher angles to
increase particle rolling towards the outﬂow opening, while cleanﬂuid exists
laterally through the mesh. Overall, we built four different ﬁlter elements
that covered three different length,i.e. small, medium and large, and twoα,
i.e. 11° and 22° (Table 1). Some of the species, i.e. Atlantic mackerel and
Indian mackerel, also show shortened gill rakers and teeth that point
inwards into the buccal cavity (Fig.2C). These structures were mimicked by
the hooked side of Velcro or 3D printed row of ellipsoids that can optionally
be added inside any of theﬁlter elements. For comparing the FiF element to
a conventional dead-endﬁlter design, oneﬁlter element had anα of 0° and
no outﬂow opening. The length was chosen so that theﬁltration area A
F was
kept similar to the Large-11 ﬁlter elements to allow comparisons of these
different designs (Table1).
Integration into a functional ﬁlter housing
The ﬁlter element was encased in a ﬁlter housing consisting of an inlet, a
ﬂange, a transparent pipe for visual inspection, and an outlet (Fig. 3A, B).
The outlet has two outlet pipes to separate the cleanﬂuid that exits laterally
through the ﬁlter element, i.e. the permeate (VP) with potentially lost MPs
(MP), and the drainage of concentrate ( VC)t h r o u g ht h eo u tﬂow opening
that contains the accumulated particle mass ( MC). Both outlet pipes are
equipped with automated valves to mimic the periodic cleaning and swal-
lowing in theﬁshes. Duringﬁltration mode, the concentrate valve is closed
and the permeate valve is open which accumulates particles in the ﬁlter
element and allows outﬂow of cleaned water through the mesh. For cleaning
of the ﬁlter, the permeate valve closes while the concentrate valve opens so
that the ﬂuid with the particles is directed out of the concentrate outlet and
the ﬁlter element is cleaned, here shown with MPﬁbres (Fig.3C, D). In the
ﬁshes, periodic cleaning, i.e. swallowing, was observed in intervals between
0.17 s in the Atlantic herring, 0.27 s in the Atlantic herring, 0.53 s in the
Atlantic mackerel and 3.7 s in the Indian mackerel
19.F o rt h eF i Fe x p e r i -
ments, the cleaning intervals were set to clean after half of the test suspension
passed and right before the total test suspension passed. Since volumeﬂow
depends on ﬁlter size and inlet type (Suppl ementary Fig. 5), the cleaning
intervals were adjusted according to the particularﬁlter setup and ranged
between 0.6 s and 1.3 s.
To investigate whether the inlet design and different cleaning setups
will inﬂuence the ﬂow patterns inside the ﬁlter element, we tested two
different inlet geometries and two cleaning modes using computationalﬂuid
Fig. 2 | Abstraction of morphological traits of ram-feeding ﬁshes into CAD
models and physical models. AThe cone-shaped gill arch system with a given angle
of attack α is mimicked by the support structures of theﬁlter elements (blue arrows).
The ﬁlter element is described by an in ﬂow opening diameter LM and an out ﬂow
diameter LC with a ﬁlter length of LF and a total length of LT. B The gill rakers (GR)
and denticles (D) form the meshes (red box) and are mimicked with a purchased
ﬁlter mesh that is glued onto the support structures.C Surface structures as observed
in ram-feeding scombrids are mimicked by a row of ellipsoids that mimic the short
GR, and hooked tape mimics the denticles and teeth, and is glued in the Large-11
ﬁlter element.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44454-025-00020-2 Article
npj Emerging Contaminants |            (2025) 1:18 3

===== PDF PAGE 4 =====
dynamics (CFD) (Fig.4). The geometry consisted of a rotational symmetric
Large-11ﬁlter element. To quantify the effects on theﬂow, we measured the
effective angle of attack α(eff). While the angle of attack α is deﬁned by
the ﬁlter element geometry and remains static,α(eff) is the resulting angle
by the streamlines at contact with theﬁlter mesh when theﬂow exits laterally
through Gap 1–Gap 7 (Fig. 4B). A lower positive α(eff) should result in
ﬂatter, more parallel streamlines towards theﬁlter mesh and, hence, further
increase the probability of rollin g for any particles that follow the
streamlines.
The CFD results reveal that the presence of an internal wall in the inlet
alters the localﬂow ﬁeld and improvesα(eff) at the ﬁlter mesh, especially at
Gap1 and Gap2 (Fig.4Ai, Di). Without the internal wall, the incomingﬂow is
not deﬂected but hits theﬁlter mesh in a straight line and creates a recircu-
lation zone with backﬂow through Gap 1 and Gap 2 indicated by negative
α(eff) (Fig. 4C, E and Supplementary Fig. 4). This dead zone reduces the
effectiveﬁltration area, potentially leading to uneven particle accumulation
and a less favourableﬂow distribution for semi-cross-ﬂow ﬁltration. In con-
trast, the internal wall guides theﬂow more uniformly along theﬁlter surfaces,
thereby leading to a low, but still positiveα(eff). Besides theﬁltration mode
(permeate outlet open, concentrate outlet closed, Fig.4A i ,D i ) ,w ea l s ot e s t e d
two cleaning modes, i.e. single cleaning (permeate outlet open, concentrate
outlet open, Fig. 4Aii, Dii) and double cleaning (permeate outlet closed,
concentrate outlet open, Fig.4Aiii, Diii). The three operating modes have a
signiﬁcant impact on the local ﬂ
ow orientation near theconcentrate outlet.
During both cleaning modes, backﬂo wf o r m sa tG a p6a n dG a p7 ,l e a d i n gt oa
negative α(eff) (Fig. 4C, E). This effect is especially strong in the double
cleaning mode and may be beneﬁcial for the FiF’s performance. The reverse-
throughﬂow could detach particles adhering to theﬁlter mesh andﬂush them
towards the concentrate outlet. As positiveα(eff) increases from Gap 1 to Gap
7 during theﬁltration mode, most particles willlikely deposit in the posterior
region during semi-cross-ﬂow ﬁltration. Consequently, this backﬂushing
effect may be particularly advantageous at these gaps to prevent clogging.
Table 1 | Overview of four ﬁlter elements used in the FiF and a dead-end ﬁlter for comparison
Small-22 Small-11 Medium-11 Large-11 Dead-end
Filter length LF [mm] 62.6 52.7 77.7 102.7 60.8
Angle of attack α [°] 22 11 11 11 0
Inner diameter at inlet dM [mm] 50 30.5 40.3 50 50
Inner diameter of outlet dC [mm] 10 10 10 10 0
Filtration area AF [mm2] 5075.4 3415.5 6248.0 9861.1 9860.0
The ﬁlter mesh inside each element is not shown here.
Fig. 3 | Design of theﬁlter housing and cleaning mechanism. AThe modular ﬁlter
housing consists of an inlet with a screw to de-air the system, a ﬂange, a
transparent pipe, and the outlet with a s eparation of concentrate and permeate.
The FiF separates the feed suspension, which consists of a ﬂuid volume ( VF)a n d
a particle mass ( MF), into a concentrate volume ( VC) with a particle mass
fraction ( MC)a n dt h ec l e a np e r m e a t e(VP) with a second particle mass fraction
(MP) .T h ep a r t i c l em a s sf r a c t i o nt h a tr e m a i n si nt h eﬁlter element is called the
retentate ( MR). The cleaning mechanism is regulated by the permeate valve and
the concentrate valve at the respective outlets. B Set-up of the FiF with the long
inlet and the Large-11 ﬁlter element. C Observations of MP ﬁbres in the Large-11
ﬁlter element with the snail inlet at the start of the experiment, before cleaning,
and after cleaning. D Observations of MP ﬁbres in the Small-11 ﬁlter element
with the snail inlet at the start of the experiment, before cleaning and after
cleaning.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44454-025-00020-2 Article
npj Emerging Contaminants |            (2025) 1:18 4

===== PDF PAGE 5 =====
Proof of concept of the ﬁsh-inspired ﬁlter
Our FiF retains 99.6 ± 0.8% of MPﬁbres in the lab experiments (Fig.5A, B).
While this ﬁltration efﬁciency ER is similar compared to the ﬁlter design
based on dead-end ﬁltration with 97.7 ± 3.1% for the same ﬁltration area,
our FiF delays clogging through a cone-shaped geometry in combination
with a periodic cleaning mechanism, and collects up to 84.8 ± 3.5% of the
retained 2 mm MPﬁbres, outside of the FiF in the concentrate (concentrate
ﬁltration efﬁciency E
C). In the FiF with a conical-shapedﬁlter element and
an angle of attack α = 11°, the concentrate is collected through an outlet at
the terminal end (Fig. 5A). The concentrate contained only 850 ml, i.e.
4.25% of theﬁltered ﬂuid volume. At the same time, 14.3 ± 3.7% of the MP
ﬁbres remain as retentate in theﬁlter element, which is approximately one
seventh of the MP ﬁbres in the ﬁlter element of the dead-end ﬁlter. In the
dead-endﬁlter, no MPﬁbres are collected outside theﬁlter element as it has
no concentrate outlet and all ﬂuid has to pass the ﬁlter medium, which is
typical for example in cartridgeﬁlters (Fig.5C). This comparison shows that
o u rF i Fk e e p st h eM Pﬁbres rolling or in suspension, prevents the accu-
mulation of MPﬁbres in theﬁlter itself, and allows removal of the MPﬁbres
through periodic cleaning. The majority of MP ﬁbres are collected in the
concentrate outside the FiF.
Parameter adaptation for the application in washing machines
Based on the conditions found in washing machines, aﬁlter should ﬁtt h e
available space in the washing machine housing, not add additional drag for
the pump, withstand changing volume ﬂow and ﬂow velocities, and have
high ﬁltration ef ﬁciencies (see washing machine requirements in
Fig. 4 | Flow through a 2D half of the FiF with a
Large-11 ﬁlter element using computational ﬂuid
dynamics (CFD) in COMSOL ®. We compared the
inﬂuence on ﬂow behaviour of a long inlet (9°
angled) with ( A) no inner wall and D an inner wall
during the three operating modes: (i) the con-
centrate outlet is closed and the permeate outlet is
open (ﬁltration mode), (ii) the concentrate outlet is
open and the permeate outlet is open (single clean-
ing mode) and (iii) the concentrate outlet is open
and the permeate outlet is closed (double cleaning
mode). The support structured and gaps between
the support structures of the ﬁlter elements are
exemplarily indicated in Fig. Aiii). The light blue
arrow indicates the direction of ﬂow. B The angle of
attack α (black, Aiii) is given by the ﬁlter element,
whereas the effective angle of attack α(eff) changes
depending on the orientation of the streamlines in
relation to ﬁlter mesh (blue). Note that the colour
scale indicating ﬂow velocity is the same in (i) and
(ii) but differs in (iii). The change of α(eff) at the
ﬁlter mesh over the full length of the ﬁlter element
for each operation mode is plotted for the setup with
(C) no inner wall and E inner wall. The support
structures of the ﬁlter elements are shown in grey
with the separation into the seven gaps. The negative
α(eff) values in ( C) are caused by a recirculating
vortex created across the ﬁlter element and reversed
streamlines at gap1 (Supplementary Fig. 4).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44454-025-00020-2 Article
npj Emerging Contaminants |            (2025) 1:18 5

===== PDF PAGE 6 =====
Supplementary Note 1). FiF performance was evaluated on three para-
meters: ﬁltration efﬁciency of MP ﬁbres retained in the FiF ( ER), i.e. the
concentrate and retentate, MPﬁbres retained in the concentrate (EC), and
yield in concentrate (ηC), which includes the ﬁbre mass in the concentrate
(MC)a n dt h ec o n c e n t r a t ev o l u m e(VC). Yield in concentrate is especially
relevant for applications in washing machines, because a small concentrate
ﬂuid volume is preferable to reduce post-treatment and user interaction.
First, we decreased the initially designed ﬁlter element length L
F of
102.7 mm (large) and designed two smaller sizes of 77.7 mm (medium) and
52.7 mm (small) (Table1). Even though a lower α would increase particle
rolling, the length of theﬁlter and thereforeα is limited by the available space
in the washing machine. Therefore, we kept α = 11° (denoted by ‘11’ in
‘Large-11’, ‘Medium-11’ and ‘Small-11’ ﬁlter types) as presented in the
initial experiment to compare the FiF with the dead-endﬁlter (Fig.5). While
E
R remains relatively similar in Large-11 with 93.2 ± 2.8%, Medium-11 with
94.0 ± 4.2% and Small-11 with 96.0 ± 5.5%, the MPﬁbre share in the con-
centrateEC increased from 35.0 ± 12.6%, to 50.6 ± 9.4% in Medium-11 up to
65.3 ± 13.7% in Small-11 (Fig.6A). The yield in concentrateηC also slightly
increased with 83.2 ± 6.5% in Large-11, 84.9 ± 10.3% in Medium-11 and
88.8 ± 15.3% in Small-11.
When increasing α to 22° in the Small ﬁlter element (‘Small-22’), we
observed that E
R decreased from 96.0 ± 5.5% to 84.5 ± 6.7%,EC decreased
from 65.3 ± 13.7% to 37.9 ± 14.8%, andηC decreased from 88.8 ± 15.3% to
62.0 ± 14.8% (Fig.6B), suggesting that a larger angle of attack may adversely
affect performance.
As there are not only MP ﬁbres of different sizes in the washing
machine efﬂuent, but also sand, dust, pollen, hair and detergents (Supple-
mentary Note 1), we tested three mesh sizes (53, 78 and 100 μm) for the
Large-11 and two mesh sizes (53 and 100 μm) for the Small-11 (Fig. 6C).
Although mesh size is expected to in ﬂuence ﬁltration performance para-
meters, the changes showed no trend related to an increase or decrease in
mesh size (Fig. 6C).
To verify the inﬂuence of different inlet geometries on ﬁltration per-
formance, as was indicated by the CFD experiments, we tested the long inlet
at 9° with an internal wall (long inlet), a swirl inlet with a helical internal wall
and a snail inlet (Fig. 6D). The swirl inlet and the long inlet performed
similarly withE
R being 96.0 ± 5.5% and 96.2 ± 3.6%,EC being 65.3 ± 13.7%
and 66.8 ± 7.8%, and ηC being 88.8 ± 15.3% and 89.9 ± 9.4%, respectively.
The snail inlet showed a less high ER with 85.5 ± 14.1% and ηC with
67.4 ± 23.0%, butEC was slightly higher with 68.0 ± 38.3% (Fig.6D).
We also investigated the relevance of surface structures on the inside of
the ﬁlter element (Fig. 2C) because some ﬁsh species showed surface
structures directed perpendicular toα (Fig.2C). Weﬁtted the Large-11ﬁlter
element with three different surface structure designs but the results suggest
that these did not improve performance (Fig.6E).
Discussion
The best-performing FiF combination, based on the lowest share of MP
ﬁbres in the permeate and the highest yield in concentrate, is the Large-11
ﬁlter element with a mesh size of 78 μm, in combination with the swirl inlet.
It retains over 99% of the MPﬁbres with 0.8 ± 2.2% left in the permeate (ER,
Fig. 6C). The yield in concentrate ηC is 97.5 ± 5.6%. However, the best
performing FiF conﬁguration based on MPﬁb r es h a r ei nt h ec o n c e n t r a t ei s
the Small-11 ﬁlter element with a mesh size of 53 μm in combination with
the swirl inlet with 79.8 ± 6.8% (Fig.6C). This may indicate that the cleaning
mechanism covers a larger share of theﬁltration area in the Small-11ﬁlter
element. Speciﬁcally, the shear forces in semi-cross-ﬂow ﬁltration will move
the particles along the ﬁlter mesh at a low α until they deposit near the
concentrate outlet as observed in the Large-11 and Small-11ﬁlter elements
(Fig. 3C, D), similar to the forces in cross-ﬂow ﬁltration26,27. Consequently,
the reversed ﬂow near the concentrate outlet during the double cleaning
mode, as shown in the CFD simulations (Fig. 4), detaches more particles,
ﬂushes them out of theﬁlter element, and increases the share of MPﬁbres in
the concentrate. Both best performing FiFs used the swirl inlet, which might
be due to the creation of a rotational, likely turbulent ﬂow that further
reduces the positive effective angle of attack α(eff) laterally towards 0° so
ﬂow becomes more parallel to the ﬁlter medium. In cross-ﬂow ﬁltration,
turbulentﬂow is preferred over laminarﬂow because it increases the shear
rate and prevents particle deposition on the ﬁlter mesh
27.T h ep o o r e s t
performing FiF combination is the Small-22 withER being 15.5 ± 6.9% and
ηC of 62.0 ± 14.8%. This indicates that a higher angle of attack substantially
reduces the beneﬁts of semi-cross ﬂow ﬁltration (Fig.1).
Another advantage to cross- ﬂow ﬁltration is the low concentrate
volume and, therefore, an increased yield in concentrateηC. In established
cross-ﬂow ultra-, nano- and micro ﬁltration processes, the concentrate
volume ranges between 10% and 50% of the feed, depending on system
design28–30. With the conical FiF and the periodic cleaning, we achieve a
concentrate volume of 4.9 ± 1.6% of the feed across all FiF combinations
(N = 70). A smaller concentrate volume lowers post-treatment or disposal
costs, improves the cleaning efﬁciency, and reduces fouling through smaller
stagnant volume and cake layer formation. Additionally, the FiF collects
most of the MPﬁbres outside theﬁlter housing, and only one seventh of the
MP ﬁbres remain in theﬁlter element (Fig.5B). This indicates that clogging
may be delayed by up to a factor of seven. An increase in cleaning frequency
could prolong the delay; however, this might come at the expense of a high
ﬂuid volume in the concentrate. A thorough cleaning in which theﬁltration
process was set back to starting conditions was not observed as all FiF
combinations still had some MPﬁbres remaining in the retentate (Fig.6).
During examination of theﬁlter elements after the experiments, we noticed
that some MP ﬁbres were stuck in the pores in areas glued to the support
structures. Remaining MPﬁbres may necessitate that the ﬁlter element be
removed for cleaning, which is common practice in many ﬁltration pro-
cesses, such as dead-endﬁltration
31. But since most MP ﬁbres are collected
outside and the dirt-holding capacity is not limited to the volume of theﬁlter
element, cleaning time and required energy are kept to a minimum. By
collecting most MPﬁbres outside the FiF, wear on the ﬁlter medium from
mechanical cleaning (e.g. scrapes or brushes) is reduced, helping to over-
come a key limitation of conventional domesticﬁlters
31.
Besides the FiF presented here, other bio-inspiredﬁltration processes
also show potential for technical app lications. The particle separator by
Piedrahita et al.32 is inspired by cross-ﬂow ﬁltration in pump-feedingﬁsh. In
simulations, a maximum of about 70%32 and in experiments with proto-
types, a maximum of 43% of particles were retained 33. The concept of
‘ricochet separation’ was discovered in manta rays by Divi et al. 34,w h i c h
Fig. 5 | Comparison of theﬁsh-inspired ﬁlter (FiF)
with a dead-end (DE) ﬁlter element. A Atlantic
mackerel Scomber scombrus with open mouth dur-
ing ﬁlter-feeding and CAD design of the Large-11
FiF element. B Performance comparison of the DE
and FiF ﬁlter element design based on MPﬁbre share
in permeate, retentate and concentrate. C Common
engineered ﬁlter cartridge of a MP washing machine
ﬁlter and computer-aided design (CAD) of a ﬁlter
element based on that design with the sameﬁltration
area as the FiF element. For ﬁlter element dimen-
sions, see Table 1.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44454-025-00020-2 Article
npj Emerging Contaminants |            (2025) 1:18 6

===== PDF PAGE 7 =====
describes a mechanism in whi ch particles bounce off the ﬁlter lobes, i.e.
specialised gill rakers. A simpliﬁed ﬁlter lobe geometry was used to manu-
facture surface patterning on membranes to manipulate localﬂow ﬁelds and
inhibit particle deposition35. In small-scale experiments under cross-ﬂow,
the membranes with a pore size between 3.5 and 10.5 μm removed 97.6% of
MP particles of 700 nm in diameter from water 36. In 2025, the ﬁltration
p r o c e s sw a sa l s ov i r t u a l l yt e s t e di nC F Ds i m u l a t i o nf o ra na p p l i c a t i o ni nf u e l
ﬁltration, where it showed a signiﬁcant reduction in pressure drop
37.T h e
‘cross-stepﬁltration’ is another process found in ram-feedingﬁshes such as
the American paddleﬁsh and was ﬁrst described by Sanderson et al.23.T h e
proof-of-concept was shown in abstr acted models for the collection of
harmful algae38 and ﬁbre collection in washing machines16. The commercial
VORTXﬁlter by CLEANR®, a spiral adaptation of this principle, reportedly
achieves 90% ef ﬁciency for MP ﬁbres ≥50 μm, a 300% longer life and
operates without a replaceable ﬁlter39. While promising, its performance
data are currently based on manufacturer claims and focus primarily on
domestic washing machine applications. These examples reﬂect the diver-
sity of bio-inspiredﬁltration designs serving a wide range of applications—
from nanoparticle removal to domestic washing machine ﬁltration. This
diversity not only highlights the versatility of biological inspiration but also
demonstrates a growing demand for bio-inspired solutions to complex
separation challenges. In this context, the FiF offers a valuable addition and
represents an alternative route, particularly suited to applications requiring
coarse ﬁbre separation, low concentrate volumes, and modular cleaning
systems.
Currently, the MPﬁbre length is larger than all tested mesh sizes and
the rod-shaped MP ﬁbres can only pass when they encounter the mesh
perpendicularly. Smaller MPﬁbre sizes should be tested to see if the semi-
cross-ﬂow process also keeps smaller MPﬁbres in suspension or if a smaller
mesh size is required. The cut-off size of retained MPﬁbres is a crucial value
to determine if the FiF can compete with other washing machineﬁlters. So
far, it was suggested that aﬁlter should retain >80% of MPﬁbres larger than
100 μm to be competitive
40,41. While conventional cross-ﬂow ﬁltration is
typically applied to particle sizes below 10 μm using membrane-based
systems (e.g. microﬁltration or ultraﬁltration), our tests with the large MP
ﬁbres show that the design extends semi-cross-ﬂow ﬁltration to the reten-
tion of larger, elongatedﬁbres.
Fibre shape might also be a factor that inﬂuences ﬁltration efﬁciency.
The here used standardised MPﬁbres are rod-shaped, whereas textileﬁbres
are of different lengths and irregularly shaped 42. In the preliminary
experiments, we could show that different particles show different recovery
ratios and even the MPﬁbres with the best recovery ratio show a relatively
high variance in the results (Supplementary Note 3). We suspect that a small
share of MP ﬁbres deposited somewhere in the setup. Resuspension could
even contaminated the next experiment despite rinsing the test stand in
between trials, because sometimes the sum of allﬁbres exceeded 100%. In
contrast, we showed that lab contamination and scale accuracy did not have
much inﬂuence (Supplementary Note 3). More computational methods,
such asﬁnite element modelling (FEM) and CFD can complement physical
experiments with the biological mode l or engineered prototype, e.g. the
stability and hydrodynamics of GR or the role of boundary layers around
denticles in mesh formation. Though the CFD experiments were not used to
verify the physical experiments but as supplementing method, they
increased the understanding of ﬂow patterns during semi-cross-ﬂow ﬁl-
tration under changing geometries andﬁltration modes (Fig.4). Based on
these results, we would also expect thatα(eff) will increase more evenly from
inlet to concentrate outlet when the support structures are not present. This
could be achieved, for example, through the use of a stainless steelﬁlter mesh
that is rigid enough to maintain its conical shape. However, the results must
be interpreted with certain limitations in mind. The numerical model was
implemented as a two-dimensional, rotationally symmetric approximation
of the actual ﬁlter geometry and the simulations were conducted under
steady-state conditions with water as a homogeneous Newtonian ﬂuid. In
real-world applications such as washing machines, ﬂow conditions may
Fig. 6 | Filtration performance of the FiF (each N = 5) based on ﬁbre share in
permeate (brown), retentate (green), and concentrate (blue). Yield in con-
centration ηC is indicated by the mean with error bars (black). Variations include (A)
ﬁlter size with Small-11 (S), Medium-11 (M) and Large-11 (L) ﬁlter element, snail
inlet and mesh size 100 μm, B angle of attack α with the small ﬁlter element, snail
inlet and mesh size 100 μm,C mesh size with the Large-11 (left) and Small-11 (right)
ﬁlter element and snail inlet, D inlet type (swirl, long inlet at 9° with internal wall,
snail) with Small-11 ﬁlter element and mesh size 100 μm, and E bio-inspired surface
structures on a Large-11ﬁlter element (100 μm mesh size) with half way hooked tape
(L-50), full way hooked tape (L-100) and bumpy structures (L-B), and the snail inlet.
Surface structures made from hooked tape and 3D-printing mimic teeth and bumpy
gill rakers found in ram-feeding mackerels (Fig. 2). Please note that the experiments
presented in E were done with a different test volume and, therefore, cannot be
directly compared to the other results.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44454-025-00020-2 Article
npj Emerging Contaminants |            (2025) 1:18 7

===== PDF PAGE 8 =====
vary dynamically over time, complex 3Dvortices may occur, especially with
the swirl and snail inlet, and theﬂuid may contain particles or exhibit non-
uniform properties. These factors can inﬂuence localﬂow patterns,ﬁltration
efﬁciency and fouling behaviour, which could be subject of future CFD
analysis of the FiF.
In the future, the cleaning process will be one of the major challenges to
improve the FiF. Cleaning includes the reduction of theﬂuid volume in the
concentrate, drying and disposal of r etained MPs and dirt. Therefore, it
could be beneﬁcial to further analyse the inherent cleaning process inﬁshes
such as whale sharks, which use back- ﬂushing43. Another advancement
would be a sensory system that couples the cleaning intervals to the pressure
difference across the ﬁlter medium. As more ﬁbres will accumulate in the
ﬁlter element, the pressure difference will increase. Automatic cleaning at a
speciﬁc pressure threshold could prevent clogging and inform the user when
manual cleaning or replacement is required. Additionally, the FiF will have
to be tested with mixed particles, a higher particle load to determine the dirt-
holding holding capacity before clogging and failure, and other particle
types, especially those that are present in washing machine ef ﬂuents, like
textile ﬁbres from natural sources, oils, sand, dust, pollen and hair and
detergents
13,44. It is estimated that washing machineﬁlters must work in the
presence of around 30 g of potential solids when using powder detergents
and around 10 g when using liquid or gel detergents
44. These quantities are
relevant for the size of the ﬁlter, its ‘dirt-holding’ capacity and cleaning
intervals31.
When biological models are investigated, functional constraints need
to be considered. For example, the gill arch system serves as the ﬁlter
medium for retaining food particle s, while also being involved in gas
exchange and ensuring a constantﬂow along the gillﬁlaments. This poses a
trade-off, which might limit the performance of both traits 45.F o rs o l i d -
liquid separation, Hamann and Blanke 46 identiﬁed 35 different particle
separation mechanisms in suspension-feeders46. Even within ram-feeding
ﬁshes—a single category among those mechanisms —a following study
found three morphotypes just withinﬁve species19.T h i sv a r i a t i o nd e m o n -
strates the signiﬁcant potential for developing bio-inspiredﬁlters and fur-
ther optimising the FiF. For example, the ﬁlter elements could be more
tailored towards a single morphotype based on characterised traits. The
angle of attack could vary from anterior to posterior, as seen in the Atlantic
mackerel, or the radial geometry could be modiﬁed to more closely mimic
the upward-bending gill arches of the Atlantic pilchard and Atlantic
herring
19. Notably, biomimetic research is not only a means of technological
innovation, it also contributes to a deeper understanding of the biological
models themselves. As demonstrated in the angle-of-attack experiments
(Fig. 1), particle shape inﬂuences rolling behaviour and deposition, a factor
o f t e no v e r l o o k e di nm o d e l st h at assume spherical particles
26. For instance,
the behaviour of adult brine shrimp in contact with the ﬁlter was less
consistent than that of other particle types (Fig. 1D ) .A tl o wa n g l e s ,p o s t -
contact velocity occasionally exceeded pre-contact velocity (Supplementary
Fig. 3B), suggesting a possible repulsion response47.S u c hﬁndings are both
relevant to interpret the adaptations in biological models and optimisation
of engineeredﬁlters to certain particle types.
Methods
To design and validate a self-cleaning FiF for microplastic retention, we
conducted a series of design,ﬂow and performance tests.
Angle of attack and particle retention experiments
T h ew o r k i n gp r i n c i p l eo ft h eﬁlter is based on the semi-crossﬂow ﬁltration
described in our previous study on the feeding morphology in ram-feeding
ﬁshes19. In models for particle deposition in cross- ﬂow ﬁltration, it was
found that the probability of particle rolling increases with increasing lateral
crossﬂow velocity parallel to theﬁlter medium and vice versa
26. Similarly, we
hypothesise that a decrease in the angle of attack increases the chance of
particle rolling. At higher angles, the crossﬂow velocity is less parallel to the
ﬁlter medium and the force in direction of the permeate increases, which
increases the change of particle deposition. In order to test the inﬂuence ofα
on particle retention, an experimental setup was designed in which aﬁlter
medium can be positioned at angles from 0° (parallel) to 90° (perpendicular)
in increments of 10° towards the unidirectional ﬂow in a small, circular
water tunnel (Fig.7A, B). Only angles from 10° to 60° were studied because
this is the range measured in the micro-CT scans of the gill arch system of
the ﬁsh (Supplementary Fig. 2). Threeﬁlter media with a mesh size of 53 μm
(open area 40%, PES 53/40, Saati S.p.A, Italy), 100 μm (open area 44%,
PA6.6-100/51-44, Bückmann GmbH & Co. KG, Germany), and 300 μm
(open are 45%, 300/45/FDA, Franz Eckert GmbH) were selected, and four
types of particles were tested: brine shrimp eggs (0.242 ± 0.019 mm) and
adults (6.112 ± 0.993 mm) to represent natural food sources, and MP
fragments (Polyamide, median diameter 130 μm,) and MP ﬁbres (Poly-
amide, 2 mm length) to represent different MPs (Fig. 7C–Fa n dT a b l e2).
The ﬂow velocity was set to around 11 cm/s, which is in a similar range of
ﬂow velocities in washing machine outlet pipes with <0.5 m/s and particle
velocities inside ﬁsh mouths during ﬁlter feeding with 0.2 –0.65 m/s
19.A
camera (Nikon D850, Macro lens Nikkor AF-S 24-120 mm 1:4 G ED) was
positioned outside the tank to ﬁlm the particle encounter on the ﬁlter
medium. After each rotation, the camera’s focal plane was adjusted, and the
scale was recorded byﬁlming a ruler close to theﬁlter medium. The videos of
the brine shrimp eggs, adults, and MPﬁbres were analysed manually with
ImageJ (Version 2.3.0) and the manual tracking plugin. Aﬁxed point was
selected on the particles to track their motion. Each particle that came in
contact with the mesh was tracked wh en it entered the recorded video
section and ended when it was out of frame. The frame in which the particles
Fig. 7 | Experimental setup to study the interaction
of particles and ﬁlter medium with varying angle
of attack α.A Small circular ﬂow tank with a pump,
honeycombs before and after the test section, and a
holder for the ﬁlter medium. B The holder consists
of a plate with a rotating disc, featuring 10° incre-
ments, and a frame that holds the ﬁlter media with
mesh sizes of 53, 100, and 300 μm, allowing the
passage of ﬂuid through these mesh sizes. Four
particle types were tested: C brine shrimp eggs,
D brine shrimp adults, E MP fragments, and F MP
ﬁbres (for particle speci ﬁcations, see Table 2).
Scale = 1 mm.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44454-025-00020-2 Article
npj Emerging Contaminants |            (2025) 1:18 8

===== PDF PAGE 9 =====
touched the mesh was noted as ‘contact’. Before further analyses, the
number of frames was reduced to a maximum of 20 frames before and after
the contact frame. The MP fragments were semi-automatically analysed.
Therefore, only the frame of contact and the position of the MP fragment
within the frame were noted. Afterwards, Python (Python Software Foun-
dation) was used to automatically track the pre-identi ﬁed particles and
extract the particle velocity in eachframe to a maximum of 20 frames before
and after the contact frame.
Based on the extracted particle velocity in a maximum of 40 frames
for all four particle types, a Boltzmann sigmoidal curve
48 was ﬁtted to the
data using Python (Python Software Foundation). Based on the ﬁt, the
average velocity before contact, average velocity after contact, and R²o f
the ﬁt were extracted for further analysis in the R programming envir-
onment (R Core Team, R version 4.2.2, 2022). The mean of R²w a s
calculated to compare the quality of the ﬁts of each particle type and
describe the steadiness of particle motion (see Supplementary Fig. 3A for
examples). A threshold value was set to 0.3 cm/s (20% of the average
minimum velocity of all observed particles after contact with the ﬁlter
medium) to distinguish rolling particles (>0.3 cm/s) and particles that
stopped on the ﬁlter medium (<0.3 cm/s). The ratio of the number of
rolling particles to all particles gives the probability of rolling for each α,
mesh size, and particle type. Polynomial regression was ﬁtted to the data
to describe the in ﬂuence of α on probability of rolling. Because only six
points are available for the ﬁt, linear to cubic polynomial regression
(degree 1 –3) was applied to prevent an over- ﬁtted high-polynomial
regression. The Akaike ’s Information Criterion (AIC) was used to
identify the best ﬁt
49.
Biological models and ﬁlter design
The technical requirements of washing machines were matched with the
suspension feeding mechanisms (SFMs) (Supplementary Note 1) of sus-
pension feeders reviewed in a previous publication46 to identify analogous
traits in biological models. The geometry should beﬂat or funnel-shaped in a
pipe, the desired retained particle size should be 100 μm–10 mm, the driving
force should be passive, pumping, or forward movement, and SFMs should
work with a water velocity of >1 cm/s. Ram-feeding ﬁsh meet all those
criteria. As proposed by Hamann et al.19,w ed eﬁne theﬁltration process with
0° < α < 90° as semi-cross-ﬂow ﬁltration19. Similar to cross-ﬂow ﬁltration,
the particles in semi-cross- ﬂow ﬁl t r a t i o nc a ne i t h e rb er e t a i n e do nt h e
surface of the ﬁlter medium as retentate (MR), collected in the concentrate
(MC), or pass the ﬁlter medium and end up in the permeate ( MP). The
volume ﬂow is diverted into the clean permeate ( VP) and particle-loaded
concentrate (VC)( F i g .3A).
The basic shape of the ﬁlter element is a cone. The base of the cone
is the ﬁsh mouth opening and was set to a diameter of 50 mm. The apex
of the cone was designed as the concentrate outlet to resemble the
oesophagus and has a diameter of 10 mm (Fig. 2A and Table 1).
Depending on the ﬁlter element size, four to six curved struts, resem-
bling the appearance of the GA, were implemented to support the ﬁlter
mesh. The support structures of the ﬁlter element were 3D-printed
(PolyJet multi-material 3D Printer, StrataSys J35TM Pro) with a
Polyacrylate polymer resin (VeroUltra, StrataSys). The off-the-shelf
ﬁlter mesh forms square meshes and mimics GR and denticles (Fig. 2).
Across all FiF experiments, we used three different mesh sizes, i.e. 53 μm
(open area 40%, PES 53/40, Saati S.p.A, Italy), 78 μm (open area 50%,
PES 78/50, Saati S.p.A, Italy) and 100 μm (open area 44%, PA6.6-100/
51-44, Bückmann GmbH & Co.KG, Germany). This is within the range
of mesh sizes calculated for the ram-feeding ﬁsh, which ranges from
0.007 to 0.148 mm
2 f o rt h em e s hs i z e sw i t ha no p e na r e ao f5 1 . 8–71.4%19,
and as recommended in studies to retain MPs ﬁbres in washing
machines40,50.T h e ﬁlter mesh was glued inside the support structures
using acrylic super glue.
The hyoid bone, the short GR, denticles, and teeth form a structured
surface in the two scombrid species (Fig. 2C). The function of these
structures is not clear yet, but the hair and denticles might capture par-
ticles. Alternatively, we assume that the surface structures could create
additional turbulence to keep theﬁlter medium clean, similar to the d-type
structure found in the American Paddle ﬁsh
22 or dynamic cross- ﬂow
ﬁltration51. In order to observe the in ﬂuence of surface structures and
study their effect on the ﬁlter performance, a line with ellipsoids was
designed, 3D-printed (PolyJet multi-material 3D Printer, StrataSys
J35TM Pro), and glued onto the ﬁrst half of the lengthways support
structures of theﬁltering element to mimic the short GR and hyoid bone in
the scombrid species (Fig.2C). The teeth and denticles were mimicked by
hooked tape (VELCRO® HTH820) consisting of rows with hooks facing
opposite directions. In oneﬁlter element, the hooked tape was glued in the
posterior half of theﬁlter, and in another, it was glued on the entire length
(Fig. 2C).
The ﬁlter housing is modular and consists of an inlet, a ﬂange, a
transparent pipe, and an outlet (Fig. 3). The inlet leads the suspension
towards the ﬁlter element. The brassﬂange connects the inlet, transparent
pipe, and outlet with four stainless steel screws. A small screw in theﬂange
to release air from the ﬁlter housing. The transparent pipe allows us to
observe the ﬁltration process in and around the ﬁlter element and comes
in two sizes to test different ﬁlter element lengths. The outlet features two
separate outputs for concentrate and permeate, which are connected to
pipes and containers. Due to the unique design of the inlet, ﬂange, and
outlet sections, they had to be custom-made. The ﬂange was manu-
factured in the workshop at the University of Bonn. The inlet and outlet
were 3D-printed (PolyJet multi-material 3D Printer, StrataSys J35TM
Pro) using a waterproof acrylate resin polymer (VeroUltra, StrataSys).
Two automatic valves at each of the outlet pipes control the out ﬂow and
mimic the cleaning behaviour of the ﬁsh (for the development of the test
setup, see Supplementary Note 2). The valve at the permeate outﬂow was
normally open (EPK-1502-NO, 24 V, Takasago, BMT Fluid Control
Solutions GmbH), and the valve at the concentrate outﬂow was normally
closed (EPK-1502-NC, 24 V, Takasago, BMT Fluid Control Solutions
GmbH). Both valves were connected in parallel and adjustable with a
custom-made control unit. During cleaning, the valve at the concentrate
opens, and the valve at the permeate closes simultaneously. The cleaning
interval can be set to durations between 13 and 86 s, and the cleaning
process itself can be set to 0.6 –6.5 s.
Table 2 | Overview of the ﬁve different test particles and ﬁbres used for the experiments in this study
Particles Length [mm] Material Density Additional information Source/fabrication
Brine shrimp eggs 0.242 ± 0.019 NA 1.09 g/cm 3 - University of Bonn
Brine shrimp adults 6.112 ± 0.993 NA 1.09 g/cm 3 - Breeding by Sea Life Oberhausen
Cotton ﬁbres 0.2 –4 Cotton, white 1.51 g/cm 3 DMT Prüfstaub Typ 8 Provided by Hengst SE
Polyamide fragments (MP
fragments)
0.00002–2 Polyamide, orange 1.08 g/cm 3a see manufacturing process VESTAMID ® LX9057 orange E20081 by
Evonik
Flock ﬁbres (MP ﬁbres) 2 mm (dtex 3.3) Polyamide, green 1.08 g/cm 3 Dtex = 22 Borchert + Moller GmbH & Co. KG
aThe orange polyamide polymer (VESTAMID® LX9057 orange E20081) was selected because its density is close to water and its bright colour to be able to observe the particles during the experiments. The
polymer came in pellets and was reduced in size through a cryogenic grinding process at Fraunhofer UMSICHT, Oberhausen. The particle size distributi on in the obtained powder was characterised by a
Malvern Mastersizer 2000 (Hydro2000S). Particle size ranges between 0.020 and 2000 with a median of around 130 µm.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44454-025-00020-2 Article
npj Emerging Contaminants |            (2025) 1:18 9

===== PDF PAGE 10 =====
Computational ﬂuid dynamics of ﬁlter element
We performed CFD to investigate the stationaryﬂow behaviour in the FiF
using COMSOL Multiphysics® (Version 6.3) and the CFD Module. The 2D
geometry is half of the cross-section of the FiF with the Large 11ﬁlter element
(Fig. 8A). At the inlet, a constant normal in ﬂow velocity of 0.05 m/s was
applied. The inlet diameter is 0.02 m, resulting in a Reynolds number below
1000 for water at 10 °C, which justiﬁes the assumption of laminarﬂow (with a
water density of 999.7 kg/m
3 and a dynamic viscosity of 0.001308 kg/m/s).
The simulation assumes incompressible, laminarﬂow solving the Navier-
Stokes equations and a pressure boundary condition (p = 0) was applied at
the outlets (permeate and concentrate). Theﬁlter element consists of seven
separate gaps (Gap 1–Gap 7) between the gill arch like support structures
(Fig. 8A). Each gap was modelled as a ‘Screen’ boundary condition in
COMSOL®,w i t has o l i d i t yσ (blocked area/total area) of 0.56 (Screen Type:
Square mesh), which is similar to the open area of theﬁlter media used in the
physical experiments. The solidityσ is calculated from the resistance coef-
ﬁcient K (K =0 . 9 8 ( ( 1− σs)−2 − 1)1.09 and the refraction coefﬁcient η (η ¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
K2
2
/C0/C1
þ 1
q
− (K/4))52. The domain was discretized using a free tetrahedral
mesh with two boundary mesh layers on all solid surfaces (Fig.8B). We found
no dependence of the solution (ﬂow velocity vectors at the mesh) on the mesh
in the range from 18,000 domain elements and 1100 boundary elements up
to 140,000 domain elements and 3800 boundary elements. Theﬁnal mesh
consisted of approximately 42,000 elements with a maximum element size of
1.65 mm in the main domain, and re ﬁned elements of 0.12 mm near
boundaries (Fig.8B). Convergence criteria as well as monitoring the solution
variables of the model was automatically ensured by the COMSOL® software
using the default settings of the CFD module
52. The simulation aims to
qualitatively analyse theﬂow ﬁeld, with a particular focus on the effective
angle of attack α(eff). This angle was measured in COMSOL® between the
ﬁlter mesh and the ﬂow vectors of the individual streamlines relative to
theﬁlter mesh. We tested the inﬂuence of three different operational modes if
the ﬁlter house: (1) permeate outlet ope n and concentrate outlet closed
(ﬁltration mode), (2) concentrate outlet open and the permeate outlet open
(single cleaning mode), and (3) concentrate outlet open and the permeate
outlet closed (double cleaning mode). Additionally, we tested the inﬂuence of
an additional inner wall inside the long inlet at 9 ° to further observe the effect
on α(eff) along theﬁlter element. The angleα(eff) along theﬁlter element was
exported as an excelﬁle and plotted over the length of theﬁlter element using
the R Programming Environment (R Core Team, R version 4.2.2, 2022).
Filtration efﬁciency testing
A test stand was built to test the FiF ’sv o l u m eﬂow and particle ﬁltration
efﬁciency. The basic setup consists of a water reservoir (FastBrewing Starter
Kid, 30 L Volume) with a mixer, a pipe that leads the feed (VF, MF)t o w a r d s
the FiF, a pipe for the concentrate, a pipe for the permeate, and two
containers to collect both fractions (Figs.9A, B and 3A). The simple setup
reduces dust and dirt from inﬂuencing mass fraction measurements (Sup-
plementary Notes 2 and 3) and has steadyﬂow conditions. The volumeﬂow
will naturally decrease due to the decr ease of hydrostatic pressure. Pre-
liminary experiments were performed to test, optimise and measure volume
ﬂow through the test stand (Supplementary Note 2). During these experi-
ments, we observed that cotton ﬁbres would lead to a higher chance of
clogging and that the MP fragments had a very low recovery ratio. We
observed that MP fragments adhered to the inner surface of the reservoir,
which could be one reason for the low recovery ratio. Therefore, we pro-
ceeded with MPﬁbres only and added liquid detergent to increase MPﬁbre
suspension, which had no inﬂuence on the analytical procedure (Supple-
mentary Note 3).
In a ﬁrst set of experiments, the Large-11ﬁlter element was compared
to the dead-end ﬁlter element (DE) with the sameﬁltration area (Table1).
The dead-end ﬁlter element has a cylindrical shape with α of 0°, which
resembles the cartridgeﬁlter design of a commercial washing machineﬁlter
(Fig. 5C). It is closed at the end, so the retentate cannot be removed through
the concentrate out ﬂow during ﬁltration. Both were equipped with a
commercialﬁlter medium from Polyamide 6.6 with a mesh size of 100 μm
and an open area ratio of 44% (Bückmann PA6.6-100/51-44). The ﬁlter
mesh is temperature-resistant up to 140–180 °C and stable in soapy water.
To test the in ﬂuence of surface structures as observed in ram-feeding
m a c k e r e l si np r e v i o u ss t u d i e sb yt h ea u t h o r s ,t h es a m eL a r g e - 1 1ﬁlter ele-
ments were equipped with hooked tape 50% of the length of the support
structures (L-50), 100% of the support structures (L-100) and with 3D
printed bumps of 50% of the support structures (L-B) (Fig.2). Before each
trial, the valves were closed, the FiF wasﬁlled with clean water and de-aired,
and 0.625 g of MPﬁbres, 5 ml of liquid detergent were mixed in 25 l of clean
w a t e ri nt h ew a t e rr e s e r v o i r .T h ev a l v ei nt h ep e r m e a t ep i p ew a so p e n e dt o
start the experiment. Cleaning was automatically set when 10 and 20 l
passed the FiF. After the second cleaning when the valves were closed again,
the experiment was stopped. The test stand and FiF were rinsed with clean
water between each trial. The order of the experiments was chosen at ran-
dom and each test condition was replicatedﬁve times (n =5 ) .
In a second set of experiments, several factors were changed to
investigate their effectsﬁltration performance for the application in washing
machines (Supplementary Note 1). To test the FiF ’s performance and
understand the effects, only one factor was changed at a time. Overall, we
tested the in ﬂuence of three different ﬁlter element length with α = 11°
(Small-11, Medium-11, Large-11, Table1), of α in the small ﬁlter element
with α = 11° andα = 22° (Small-11, Small-22), of three different inlets (long,
snail and swirl), and of three different mesh sizes with 53, 78 and 100 μm in
the Large-11 and with 53 and 100 μm in the Small-11ﬁlter element. Before
each trial, the valves were closed, the FiF wasﬁlled with clean water and de-
aired, and 0.5 g of MPﬁbres, 5 ml of liquid detergent were mixed in 20 l of
Fig. 8 | Virtual setup for the computational ﬂuid
dynamics (CFD) study of the FiF. A The 2D geo-
metry was based on a FiF with the Large-11 ﬁlter
element and the long inlet tapered at 9°. The inlet
was modelled with and without inner wall (indicated
by yellow line). The cross section of theﬁlter element
led to seven gaps between the support structures
(Gap 1–Gap 7). The ﬁlter mesh at the gaps was
modelled with the COMSOL ® inbuilt screen func-
tion (indicated by dashed orange lines). The direc-
tion of the ﬂow is indicated by the blue arrow. B The
free tetrahedral mesh is extra ﬁne at the ﬁlter ele-
ment and has two boundary mesh layers on all solid
surfaces.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44454-025-00020-2 Article
npj Emerging Contaminants |            (2025) 1:18 10

===== PDF PAGE 11 =====
clean water in the water reservoir. The valve in the permeate pipe was
opened to start the experiment. Cleaning was automatically set when 5 and
10 l passed the FiF. Note that the second set of experiments used a smaller
feed volume. After the second cleaning, when the valves were closed again,
the experiment was stopped. The test stand and FiF were rinsed with clean
water between each trial. The order of the experiments was chosen ran-
domly, and a total of ﬁve trials per combination were tested.
Three ﬂuid volume (V) and mass (M) samples were taken after each
trial: (1) the total volume of the concentrate (V
C and MC), (2) one litter of the
permeate (VP and MP), and (3) all the MP ﬁbres that remained within
theﬁlter, i.e. the retentate (MR) re-suspended in a maximum of one litter. The
MP ﬁbre mass fractions were separated from the water using a suctionﬁlter
(Nalgene Reusable Bottle Top Filter) with round ﬁltering papers (ROTI-
LABO Type 11 A, ø 45 mm, retention range 12–15 μm) and a vacuum pump
(Vaccubrand MZ 2 C, 1.7 m³/h = 28.3 l/min). Prior to the vacuumﬁltration,
the ﬁltering papers were labelled, dr ied in a heating cabinet (minimum
30 min), cooled down in a desiccator (minimum 30 min), and weighted with
a precision scale (Sartorius ED153-CW, weighing capacity 150 g, readability
0,001 g, repeatability (std. deviation)≤ ±0.001 g). After the samples were
poured onto the suctionﬁlter, the bottle, bottle cap, and walls of the suction
ﬁlter were rinsed with deionized water, so all MPﬁbres were collected on the
ﬁltering paper. Afterwards, theﬁltering papers with the MPﬁbres (Fig.9C)
were dried in a heating cabinet and a desiccator and weighed again. The
weight difference determined theﬁbre mass fraction of each sample. The
samples of the permeate were thereby multiplied by the totalﬁltered volume
minus the volume in the concentrate to account for the subsample taken
from the total permeate volume.
Contamination controls
To test the lab contamination and the scale’s accuracy, three control samples
of 1000 ml of clean tap water were analysed using the same analytical
p r o c e d u r ea n dw e i g h e dt h r e et i m e s .T h ew e i g h td i f f e r e n c eo ft h eﬁlter
papers without experimental samples are 0.00107, 0.00010, and 0.00010 g.
Additionally, we ran three blank trials after rinsing the test stand and
without adding MPﬁbres to determine the contamination of the test stand
and the inﬂuence of previous trials. The weight difference of theﬁlter papers
with the blank samples are 0.00082, −0.00029 and −0.00059 g for the
concentrate samples and −0.00667, −0.01148 and −0.01574 g for the
permeate samples. Due to these differences in the permeate samples, all
results are rounded to two decimal places. Additionally, when the weight
difference of permeate samples were negative (difference of ﬁlter paper
before and after experiments) but within ±0.01 g, they were changed to
0.00 g as we assume that contamination had an in ﬂuence. We changed a
total of nine negative values to 0.00.
Performance metrics
The different FiF combinations were evaluated based on a set of established
ﬁltration performance metrics. The main goal of solid-liquid ﬁlters is to
separate solid particles from aﬂuid and is usually expressed as theﬁltration
efﬁciency. The ﬁltration efﬁciency is the ratio of upstream particle con-
centration to the downstream particle concentration of the ﬁlter medium
and is expressed in per cent31.
We calculated two ﬁltration efﬁciencies to account for the three dif-
ferent MPﬁbre mass fractions of the FiF.ER is the share of MPﬁbres that are
retained in the ﬁltration system, i.e. the concentrate and retentate (Eq.1),
which can also be expressed as the su btraction of the share found in the
permeate and is a typical performance criterion forﬁlters, also forﬁlters in
washing machines40. If all particles were retained within theﬁlter and none
were lost to the permeate,ER would be 100%.
ER ¼ MC þ MR
MCþPþR
/C18/C19
/C3 100 ¼ 1 /C0 MP
MCþPþR
/C18/C19/C18/C19
/C3 100 ð1Þ
with ER = Filtration efﬁciency in concentrate and retentate, MC =P a r t i c l e
mass in concentrate [g],MP =P a r t i c l em a s si np e r m e a t e[ g ] ,MR =P a r t i c l e
mass in retentate [g].
The otherﬁltration efﬁciency parameter isEC, which is the share of MP
ﬁbres that is retained in the concentrate (Eq. 2). EC should be as high as
possible because the FiF is designed to accumulate most of the MPﬁbres in
the concentrate to avoid clogging.
EC ¼ MC
MCþPþR
/C18/C19
/C3 100 ð2Þ
EC = Filtration efﬁciency in concentrate,MC = Particle mass in concentrate
[g], MP = Particle mass in permeate [g],MR = Particle mass in retentate [g].
The concentrating factorX is the ratio of the feed volume in the water
reservoir to theﬂu i dv o l u m ec o l l e c t e di nt h ec o n c e n t r a t e( E q .3). The aim is
to keep the concentrating factor as high as possible so that post- ﬁltration
treatment of the concentrate is kept minimal.
X ¼ VF
VC
/C18/C19
ð3Þ
with X = Concentrating factor, VF = Feed volume [l], VC = Concentrate
volume [l].
Because the FiF is similar to a cross-ﬂow ﬁlter, the performance is also
described as the yield in concentrateηC. This parameter combines the MP
ﬁb r em a s si nt h ec o n c e n t r a t eER and the concentrating factor X as is
Fig. 9 | Design of the test stand to measure ﬁlter
performance. A The test stand consists of a water
reservoir with a mixer, the ﬁlter housing with a de-
airing option, and two containers to collect the
permeate and concentrate. B The ﬁlter housing
allows for testing of different ﬁlter elements. A
manual valve enables regulating the inﬂow, and two
automatic valves regulate the out ﬂow and cleaning
of the ﬁlter element. C After each experiment, three
MP ﬁbre fractions (green) were analysed: MP ﬁbres
collected in the concentrate (top), MP ﬁbres col-
lected in the permeate (middle), and MP ﬁbres
retained in the ﬁlter element, the retentate (bottom).
For details of the test procedure, see Supplementary
Notes 2 and 3.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44454-025-00020-2 Article
npj Emerging Contaminants |            (2025) 1:18 11

===== PDF PAGE 12 =====
expressed in percent (Eq.4). The function is nonlinear and increases sharply
as ER approaches 100%. A high value indicates a good-performing cross-
ﬂow ﬁlter.
ηC ¼ XðER /C0 100Þ /C3 100 ð4Þ
with ηC = Yield in concentrate [%], X = Concentrating factor,
ER = Filtration efﬁciency.
The volume ﬂow rate was determined as part of the preliminary
experiments and is described in the Supplementary Material (Supplemen-
tary Note 2 and Supplementary Fig. 5).
All data were analysed in the R Programming Environment (R Core
Team, R version 4.2.2, 2022) and visualised using the ggplot2 package53.W e
report mean values with standard deviation in the text. The experimental
studies conducted served to elucidate theﬁlter mechanism. More and dif-
ferently designed experimental data would be needed for a comprehensive
statistical analysis. The available data for the ﬁlter performance were
therefore primarily evaluated qualitatively. All ﬁgures were laid out with
Scribus (Version 1.5.8).
Data availability
All data is available in the main text or the supplementary materials.
Received: 7 July 2025; Accepted: 20 October 2025;
References
1. Triebskorn, R. et al. Relevance of nano- and microplastics for
freshwater ecosystems: a critical review. TrAC 110, 375–392 (2019).
2. Chia, R. W., Lee, J. Y., Kim, H. & Jang, J. Microplastic pollution in soil
and groundwater: a review.Environ. Chem. Lett.19,4 2 1 1–4224 (2021).
3. Evangeliou, N. et al. Atmospheric transport is a major pathway of
microplastics to remote regions. Nat. Commun. 11, 3381 (2020).
4. Gkoutselis, G. et al. Microplastics accumulate fungal pathogens in
terrestrial ecosystems. Sci. Rep. 11,1 –13 (2021).
5. Yin, L. et al. Interactions between microplastics/nanoplastics and
vascular plants. Environ. Pollut. 290, 117999 (2021).
6. Nelms, S. E., Galloway, T. S., Godley, B. J., Jarvis, D. S. & Lindeque, P.
K. Investigating microplastic trophic transfer in marine top predators.
Environ. Pollut. 238, 999–1007 (2018).
7. Zhao, B. et al. Science of the total environment the potential toxicity of
microplastics on human health.Sci. Total Environ.912, 168946 (2024).
8. Rochman, C. M. et al. Rethinking microplastics as a diverse
contaminant suite. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 38, 703–711 (2019).
9. Steensgaard, I. M. et al. From macro- to microplastics - Analysis of EU
regulation along the life cycle of plastic bags. Environ. Pollut. 224,
289–299 (2017).
10. Munhoz, D. R., Harkes, P., Beriot, N., Larreta, J. & Basurko, O. C.
Microplastics: a review of policies and responses. Microplastics 2,
1–26 (2022).
11. Auta, H. S., Emenike, C. U. & Fauziah, S. H. Distribution and
importance of microplastics in the marine environment: a review of the
sources, fate, effects, and potential solutions. Environ. Int. 102,
165–176 (2017).
12. Clausen, L. P. W., Hansen, O. F. H., Oturai, N. B., Syberg, K. & Hansen,
S. F. Stakeholder analysis with regard to a recent European restriction
proposal on microplastics. PLoS ONE 15, e0235062 (2020).
13. Zhang, Y.-Q. et al. Microplastics from textile origin – emission and
reduction measures. Green Chem. 23, 5247–5271 (2021).
14. Boucher, J. & Friot, D. Primary Microplastics in the Oceans: A Global
Evaluation of Sources. https://www.iucn.org/content/primary-
microplastics-oceans (2017).
15. Sherrington, C., Darrah, C., Hann, S., Cole, G. & Corbin, M. Study to
support the development of measures to combat a range of marine
litter sources. Report for European Commission DG Environment.
429,1 –432 (2016).
16. Masselter, T. et al. Improvement of a micro ﬁber ﬁlter for domestic
washing machines. Bioinspir. Biomim. 18, 016017 (2023).
17. Iyare, P. U., Ouki, S. K. & Bond, T. Microplastics removal in wastewater
treatment plants: a critical review. Environ. Sci. Process. Impacts 6,
2664–2675 (2020).
18. Gao, D., Li, X. & Liu, H. Source, occurrence, migration and potential
environmental risk of microplastics in sewage sludge and during
sludge amendment to soil. Sci. Total Environ. 742, 140355 (2020).
1 9 . H a m a n n ,L .e ta l .D i v e r s i t yo fﬁlter feeding and variations in cross-ﬂow
ﬁltration of ﬁve ram-feeding ﬁsh species. Front. Mar. Sci. 10,1 –21
(2023).
20. Sanderson, S. L. L., Cheer, A. Y. A. Y., Goodrich, J. S. J. S., Graziano,
J. D. J. D. & Callan, W. T. T. Crossﬂow ﬁltration in suspension-feeding
ﬁshes. Nature 412, 439–441 (2001).
21. Sanderson, S. L. et al. Mucus entrapment of particles by a
suspension-feeding tilapia (Pisces: Cichlidae). J. Exp. Biol. 199,
1743–1756 (1996).
22. Brooks, H., Haines, G. E., Lin, M. C. & Sanderson, S. L. Physical
modeling of vortical cross-step ﬂow in the American paddle ﬁsh,
Polyodon spathula. PLoS ONE 13, e0193874 (2018).
23. Sanderson, S. L., Roberts, E., Lineburg, J. & Brooks, H. Fish mouths
as engineering structures for vortical cross-step ﬁltration. Nat.
Commun. 7, 11092 (2016).
24. Storm, T. J., Nolan, K. E., Roberts, E. M. & Sanderson, S. L.
Oropharyngeal morphology related to ﬁltration mechanisms in
suspension-feeding American shad (Clupeidae). J. Exp. Zool. Part A
Ecol. Integr. Physiol. 333, 493–510 (2020).
25. Paig-Tran, E. W. M. W. M., Bizzarro, J. J. J. J., Strother, J. A. J. A. &
Summers, A. P. A. P. Bottles as models: predicting the effects of
varying swimming speed and morphology on size selectivity and
ﬁltering efﬁciency in ﬁshes. J. Exp. Biol. 214, 1643–
1654 (2011).
26. Di, H., Martin, G. J. O. & Dunstan, D. E. Characterization of particle
deposition during crossﬂow ﬁltration as inﬂuenced by permeate ﬂux
and crossﬂow velocity using a micro ﬂuidic ﬁltration system. Front.
Chem. Sci. Eng. 15, 552–561 (2021).
27. Richardsons, J. F., Harker, J. H. & Backhurst, J. R. Coulson and
Richardson’s Chemical Engingeering: Particle Technology and
Separation Processes Vol. 2 (Butterworth-Heinemann, 2002).
28. Scholz, W. & Lucas, M. Techno-economic evaluation of membrane
ﬁltration for the recovery and re-use of tanning chemicals. Water Res.
37, 1859–1867 (2003).
29. Kowalska, I., Kabsch-Korbutowicz, M., Majewska-Nowak, K. &
Pietraszek, M. Removal of detergents from industrial wastewater in
ultraﬁltration process. Environ. Prot. Eng. 31, 207–219 (2005).
30. Żyłła, R., Foszpańczyk, M., Olak-Kucharczyk, M., Marsza łek, J. &
Ledakowicz, S. Removal of organic compounds with an amino group
during the nanoﬁltration process. Membranes 12,1 –14 (2022).
31. Sutherland, K. Filters and Filtration Handbook (Elsevier, 2008).
32. Piedrahita, R. H. & Hung, T. C. Cross ﬂow ﬁltration particle separator.
The Patent number is US 2015/0143784 A1. The Regents of the
University of California USA (2015).
33. Hung, T. & Piedrahita, R. H. Experimental validation of a novel bio-
inspired particle separator. Aquac. Eng. 58,1 1–19 (2014).
34. Divi, R. V., Strother, J. A. & Paig-Tran, E. W. M. Manta rays feed using
ricochet separation, a novel nonclogging ﬁltration mechanism. Sci.
Adv. 4, eaat9533 (2018).
35. Li, Z., Tan, C. M., Tio, W., Ang, J. & Sun, D. D. Manta ray gill inspired
radially distributed nanoﬁbrous membrane for efﬁcient and continuous
oil–water separation.Environ. Sci. Nano 5
, 1466–1472 (2018).
36. Zhang, X. et al. Biomimetic gill-inspired membranes with direct-
through micropores for water remediation by ef ﬁciently removing
microplastic particles. Chem. Eng. J. 434, 134758 (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44454-025-00020-2 Article
npj Emerging Contaminants |            (2025) 1:18 12

===== PDF PAGE 13 =====
37. Tsai, C., Hwu, C. & Wei, Y. Biomimetic fuel ﬁltration for air vehicles
based on Ricochet separation inspired by manta rays. Sep. Purif.
Technol. 371, 133331 (2025).
38. Schroeder, A., Marshall, L., Trease, B., Becker, A. & Sanderson, S. L.
L. Development of helical, ﬁsh-inspired cross-step ﬁlter for collecting
harmful algae. Bioinspir. Biomim. 14, 056008 (2019).
39. Ramasamy, R., Nallendiran, L. & Subramanian, R. B. Microﬁber ﬁlters for
laundry: a systematic review of effectiveness and future research
directions for pollution mitigation.Water Air Soil Pollut.236,1 –24 (2025).
40. Browne, M. A., Ros, M. & Johnston, E. L. Pore-size and polymer affect
the ability of ﬁlters for washing-machines to reduce domestic
emissions of ﬁbres to sewage. 1 –17 https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0234248 (2020).
41. McIlwraith, H. K. et al. Capturing micro ﬁbers – marketed technologies
reduce microﬁber emissions from washing machines. Mar. Pollut.
Bull. 139,4 0–45 (2019).
42. Hernandez, E., Nowack, B. & Mitrano, D. M. Polyester textiles as a
source of microplastics from households: a mechanistic study to
understand microﬁber release during washing. Environ. Sci. Technol.
51, 7036–7046 (2017).
43. Motta, P. J. et al. Feeding anatomy, ﬁlter-feeding rate, and diet of
whale sharks Rhincodon typus during surface ramﬁlter feeding off the
Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico. Zoology 113, 199–212 (2010).
44. Schöpel, B. & Stamminger, R. A comprehensive literature study on
microﬁbres from washing machines. Tenside Surfactants Deterg. 56,
94–104 (2019).
45. Broeckhoven, C. & du Plessis, A. Escaping the labyrinth of
bioinspiration: biodiversity as key to successful product innovation.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2110235,1 –8 (2022).
46. Hamann, L. & Blanke, A. Suspension feeders: diversity, principles of
particle separation and biomimetic potential. J. R. Soc. Interface 19,
20210741 (2022).
47. Rashid, M. T. et al. Artemia swarm dynamics and path tracking.
555–
563 https://doi.org/10.1007/s11071-011-0237-6 (2012).
48. Motulsky, H. & Christopoulos, A. Fitting Models to Biological Data using
Linear and Nonlinear Regression. (GraphPad Software Inc., 2003).
49. Burnham, K. P. & Anderson, D. R. Model Selection and Multimodel
Inference: A Practical Information-Theoretic Approach. (Springer New
York, 2002).
50. De Falco, F. et al. Development and performance evaluation of a
ﬁltration system for washing machines to reduce microﬁber release in
wastewater. Water Air Soil Pollut . 232, 406 (2021).
51. Bott, R., Langeloh, T. & Ehrfeld, E. Dynamic cross ﬂow ﬁltration. Chem.
Eng. J. 80, 245–249 (2000).
52. COMSOL Multiphysics ®. CFD Module User ’s Guide. 710 at (2024).
53. Wickham, H. ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis . (Springer
International Publishing, 2016).
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Ilka Gehrke and Jan Blömer from Fraunhofer UMSICHT,
Oberhausen, for discussing the experimental setup and results with us. We
thank the R&D engineers from Hengst SE for sharing their knowledge and
experience of testing microplasticﬁlters in a lab environment. LH and AB
were supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (grant
agreement no. 754290). CR, HH, KS and CG were supported by the Federal
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) under the program
"Ideenwettbewerb Biologisierung der Technik" (grant agreement no.
13XP5164A) awarded to A.B. and Dr. Gehrke.
Author contributions
L.H., A.B., H.H., C.G. and C.R. planned and conceptualised the study. L.H.,
H.H., C.R. and C.G. developed the methodology. L.H., K.S., H.H. and C.R.
performed and analysed the physical experiments. CG and HH performed
and analysed the numerical experiments. L.H., H.H., C.R. and C.G.
visualised the data and L.H. prepared all ﬁnal ﬁgures. L.H. and A.B.
performed project supervision. L.H. wrote the main manuscript text. All
authors reviewed and edited the manuscript.
Competing interests
A patent for the new ﬁsh-inspired ﬁlter was ﬁled at the German Patent and
Trade Mark Ofﬁce in March 2023 (Germany: DE102023001223A1 granted,
World: WO002024199585A1 pending). Otherwise, the authors declare that
they have no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary informationThe online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44454-025-00020-2.
Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to
Leandra Hamann.
Reprints and permissions informationis available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article ’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
.
© The Author(s) 2025
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44454-025-00020-2 Article
npj Emerging Contaminants |            (2025) 1:18 13