Journal of Environmental Management 317 (2022) 115347
Available online 26 May 2022
0301-4797/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Review 
Review on alternatives for the reduction of textile microfibers emission 
to water 
Francisco Belzagui
1
, Carmen Guti ´errez-Bouz ´an
* 
Institut d ’ Investigaci ´o T `extil i Cooperaci ´o Industrial de Terrassa (INTEXTER), Universitat Polit `ecnica de Catalunya, C/Colom 15, Terrassa, Spain   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Microfiber 
Detachment 
Pollution 
Water 
Microplastic 
Textiles 
ABSTRACT  
The microplastics (MPs) are considered one of the most threatening pollutants. One of the main concerns is their 
continuous and cumulative flow to water environments, as they are very difficult to be removed. Microfibers 
(MFs) are a significant type of MPs, with textile articles as one of the most renowned sources. This review aims to 
provide the current status of these MFs as pollutants, discussing possible alternatives from the manufacturing 
until the final disposition of MFs. There are many alternatives to reduce these pollutants from reaching the 
environment but also gaps that need to be further evaluated and addressed. Besides, it should be noticed that 
alternatives could be complementary between them. Some viable and non-contaminating solutions to reduce this 
pollution are currently on the market. Also, one relevant aspect is the final disposition or usage of the retained 
MFs to avoid them from reaching aquatic environments.   
1. Introduction 
Water scarcity is becoming an increasing problem and the survey of 
its quality is a major concern. For this reason, numerous studies have 
been focused on water purification ( Elwakeel et al., 2020 ; He et al., 
2022 ) and wastewater remediation ( Ahmed M Elgarahy et al., 2021a , 
2021b ; C. Zhou et al., 2022 ). Special attention must be paid to the 
removal of non-biodegradable pollutants that can provoke serious 
threats due they can be accumulated in the environment and introduced 
in the trophic chain ( Ahmed M Elgarahy et al., 2021a , 2021b ). There is a 
huge amount of non-biodegradable pollutants, such as antibiotics, dyes, 
microplastics (MPs) and microfibres (MFs). 
The still under-revision definition of the European Chemical Agency 
(ECHA) indicates that the microfibers (MFs) are particles with a length 
to diameter ratio > 3 and a maximum length of 15 mm ( ECHA, 2019 ). If 
those come from chemically modified and/or non-biodegradable poly -
mers, they are considered as a type of microplastics (MPs). These pol -
lutants have been constantly found contaminating every ecosystem. It 
has been estimated that there are from 15 to 51 trillion floating MPs in 
marine environments and 14 million tons in the top 9 cm of sediments of 
the world ’ s oceans ( Barrett et al., 2020 ; UNEP and GRID-Arendal, 2016 ; 
van Sebille et al., 2015 ). MPs can be divided into primary or secondary. 
Primary are those emitted into the environment in a MPs size range ( < 5 
mm) where as secondary are generated in the environment from phys -
ical degradation and fragmentation processes of larger plastic debris 
( Ahmed M Elgarahy et al., 2021a , 2021b ). In this way, primary MPs 
include a wide variety of sources (e.g., MFs detached from textile gar -
ments, plastic pellets, tire dust); while secondary MPs have their origin 
in mismanaged plastic garbage ( Boucher and Friot, 2017 ). Textile MFs 
have received significant attention as these have been extensively found 
across the environment. For instance, Alavian Petroody et al. (2020) 
reported that most of the MPs found in water treatment plants were MFs, 
from which polyester MFs were identified at the highest concentration, 
followed by polyamide and acrylic. This is in line with the main syn -
thetic fibers that are manufactured across the world. 
Regarding their impacts, the ingestion across the trophic chain has 
extensively been reported, as these particles have been found in at least 
200 species ( Collignon et al., 2012 ; Fossi et al., 2014 ; GESAMP, 2015a ; 
Ohkubo et al., 2020 ; Patterson et al., 2019 ). Also, some works have 
found that these particles can potentially have negative effects, such as 
MPs ’ retention, trophic transfer, and endocrine disruption, among 
others ( Jemec et al., 2016 ; Nelms et al., 2018 ; Rochman et al., 2014 ; 
Welden and Cowie, 2016 ). Moreover, MPs can behave as long-distance 
vectors for invasive species and hydrophobic compounds ( Browne 
et al., 2013 ; Mao et al., 2020 ; Rochman et al., 2013 ; Ta and Babel, 2020 ; 
Turner et al., 2020 ). Besides, these contaminants have been identified in 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: m.carmen.gutierrez@upc.edu (C. Guti ´errez-Bouz ´an).   
1 
In the memory of our beloved Francisco Belzagui. INTEXTER will always remember you. 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Journal of Environmental Management 
journal homep age: www. elsevier.com/ locate/je nvman 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2022.115347 
Received 4 March 2022; Received in revised form 4 May 2022; Accepted 16 May 2022   

Journal of Environmental Management 317 (2022) 115347
2
human-consumption products as seafood, tap and bottled water, fruits, 
vegetables, and table salt ( Abidli et al., 2019 ; G. Chen et al., 2021 ; Cox 
et al., 2019 ; O β mann, 2021 ; Rochman et al., 2015 ; Schymanski et al., 
2018 ; Shruti et al., 2020 ; Teng et al., 2019 ; Van Cauwenberghe and 
Janssen, 2014 ; Yang et al., 2015 ). Nevertheless, the potential risks for 
human health are still an unknown area of study ( Vital et al., 2021 ). 
This review aims to evaluate the different alternatives suggested to 
reduce the textile MFs ’ pollution. The review is divided into four levels: 
(1) textile manufacturing, (2) garments laundering, (3) used water 
treatment plants, and (4) gaps that must be treated to close the loop of 
this specific MFs contamination. Fig. 1 shows a summary of the infor -
mation included in this document. This figure also illustrates that there 
is still a lot of gaps to find a circular trend for MFs. 
To be more explicit, (1) textile manufacturing refers to all treatments 
and proceedings applied in the production of textile articles in general 
before their use. (2) Garments laundering involves the washing and 
drying processes. (3) The used water treatment plants section includes 
what happens when the MFs contained in the effluents from laundering 
processes reach a possible water treatment plant and the effects that 
these particles have on the treatments. And (4), The gaps of this 
contamination, indicates criteria, requirements and alternatives to 
reduce this pollution. The MFs that can be generated in the daily use or 
final disposal of a textile article are out of the scope of this study. 
2. Manufacturing, dyeing, and industrial processes 
The textile or apparel industry is the business for the manufacture of 
fibers, yarns, fabrics, clothing, and articles for home and/or decoration. 
Textile and clothing activities present different treatments which have 
enormous variations between them ( Bullon et al., 2017 ). In this sense, 
there is still a lack of rigor regarding MFs ’ reduction techniques applied 
in the manufacturing process of the textile industry. Besides, there are 
uncountable textile mills spread around the globe. Moreover, devel -
oping countries produce 50% of the world ’ s textile exports and 75% of 
the world ’ s clothing exports. In some of these countries, environmental 
regulations are not usually a governmental priority and water treatment 
plants are scarce ( Mara, 2004 ) ( UN-Water, 2021 ). 
Textiles release MFs during production, use, and at end-of-life 
disposal. For this reason, this industry can play an important role in 
the reduction of MFs by upgrading their processes and their products 
( Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2017 ; Henry et al., 2019 ). Also, according 
to Xu et al. (2021) , the MFs should be included in the concept of the 
circular economy, providing a regulatory framework to address this 
pollution ( Xu et al., 2021 ). However, the textiles and apparel industry 
accounts for a very high percentage of total manufacturing occupations 
in many countries where poverty mitigation is a central issue ( InfoDev, 
2008 ). This complicates the challenging task to achieve a global adap -
tation to sustainable techniques that target the reduction of MFs ’ 
detachment. Besides, the term “ microfiber ” is not usually found in books 
or references for improvements in the sustainability in the textile in -
dustry (e.g., Muthu (2017) ). This is an indirect demonstration that 
textile MFs are not receiving the attention that they should. The trend is 
more focused onto the customer expectation fulfillment or the currently 
“ fast-fashion ” trend and the waste that it generates. This last topic is 
another problem that must be treated as more than 70% of the annual 
fiber production for clothing is burnt or disposed in landfills, which 
involves a great wastage of every kind of resources (water, energy, 
textiles, etc.) ( Rese et al., 2022 ) Rahman et al. (2022) . 
There are many examples of improved techniques to enhance pro -
ductivity. For instance, in recent decades several new spinning systems 
have been introduced to the industry. These systems have resulted in 
important enhancements in yarn productivity but not necessarily in yarn 
quality ( Islam, 2019 ; Nergis, 2017 ). Yet, there are some studies that are 
looking forward sustainable techniques like using wet spinning of fun -
gus to create monofilament yarns ( Svensson et al., 2021 ). The type of 
fabric (woven, knitted, etc.) also seems to play an important role. For 
example, De Falco et al. (2018b) reported that woven polyester released 
the highest number of MFs when compared to knitted polyester and 
woven polypropylene. Carney Almroth et al. (2018) observed that 
polyester fleece fabrics shed much more MFs than knitted fabrics made 
of polyester, acrylic, and polyamide. They also reported that high 
twisted yarns are less prone to detach MFs, which is in line with the 
observation exposed in Table 1 . 
On the other hand, in a study conducted by Zambrano et al. (2020) , 
an evaluation of cotton knitted fabrics was done. They reported relevant 
information that can be furtherly assessed with synthetic fabrics. They 
found that the treatments applied during textile processing influenced 
the MFs released during laundering. In this sense, fabrics treated with 
softeners generated the longest MFs, while durable press and water re -
pellent generated the shortest ones. They pointed out that, in general, 
fabrics with more abrasion resistance, higher friction coefficient, and 
less softness (i.e., fuzz or hairiness) reduce the detachment of MFs. In 
this line, a Life European project evaluated textile procedures and pub -
lished a guideline of “ better practices ” and main barriers for any in -
dustry relevantly linked to the textile chain ( Mermaids, 2018 ). The key 
issues identified were the fiber (fineness, irregularities, length), the yarn 
(number of plies, twist, count), the fabric (structure, density, processes 
as dyeing and finishing), and garment washing in factories and their 
wastewater management. A summary of their observations is listed in 
Table 1 . 
Textile parks also are a source of MFs. For instance, the work of Zhou 
et al. (2020) explored the MFs ’ presence in a typical textile park in 
Fig. 1. Summary of the information included in this document.  
F. Belzagui and C. Guti ´errez-Bouz ´an                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Journal of Environmental Management 317 (2022) 115347
3
China. They found that these installations can release as much as 54 ×
10
3 
MFs/L in printing and dyeing wastewaters. However, The MFs ’ 
generation was seen to significantly vary between mills. Hence, the 
authors discerned between the treatments that are applied in each 
textile plant, supporting the idea that the release of MFs is crucially 
influenced by the raw fabric materials and the conditions and chemical 
products applied in each industrial process. In this sense, the mill with 
the most concentration of MFs worked with rayon as raw material, 
which is usually subjected to heavy treatments like high temperatures 
and pressures. It has to be mentioned that, under the definition of the 
ECHA, rayon MFs are also considered as MPs. This means that the MPs ’ 
pollution could be underestimated because usually many authors do not 
include rayon MFs as a type of MPs. In addition, textile printing and 
dyeing might be a more significant source of MFs than domestic 
washing, which is on the order of half a million tons per year ( Belzagui 
et al., 2020 ). According to this work, the studied mills have their own 
water treatment plants (WTPs), in which the efficiencies went from 85% 
to 99% of MFs ’ removal. The final effluents of these WTPs are subse -
quently treated in a centralized facility, from where they estimated a 
MFs ’ release of 430 billion particles per day. 
On the other hand, producing and manufacturing textiles from nat -
ural rather than man-made or synthetic fibers has also been mentioned 
as a possible alternative to reduce the MFs ’ pollution. This statement is, 
at least, debatable, as nowadays most of the cotton business is based on a 
highly pollutant and environmentally unsustainable production ( Allary, 
2021 ; Garcia et al., 2019 ; Maraseni et al., 2010 ; Rukhaya et al., 2021 ). 
For instance, cotton production uses 2.5% of world ’ s farmlands but 
consumes 25% of world ’ s insecticides and 80% of total water usage in 
the textile sector ( Garcia et al., 2019 ). Hence, this claim can only be 
considered as an option in particular cases where it can be proved, for 
instance, by making a life cycle analysis (LCA) that the declaration is 
true. Regarding only the MFs ’ detachment, Salvador et al. (2020) re -
ported that cotton articles shed more MFs than synthetic ones. However, 
these findings must be treated carefully to avoid misleading and 
generalized conclusions. In other words, there is a lack of 
inter-laboratory repeatability to ensure that the outcomes are accurate. 
With regards to mixtures of materials, i.e., blends of synthetic and 
natural polymers, a reduction of MFs detachment might be achieved. In 
this sense, Napper and Thompson (2016) reported that, independently 
of the washing treatment, polyester - cotton (65/35%) blend fabrics 
detached fewer MFs than garments made only of polyester or acrylic. 
Conversely, Zambrano et al. (2019) found that polyester-cotton 
(50/50%) blends, as well as cotton and rayon ones, detached more 
MFs than polyester fabrics. This might again suggest that the fabrics ’ 
specific manufacturing process and the proportion of materials play an 
important role in the MFs shedding rate. Besides, polyester, cotton, and 
their blends receive different dying treatments that could be an impor -
tant parameter to be furtherly examined. However, mixed materials can 
hamper the possible subsequent recycling procedure ( Herweyers et al., 
2020 ). Hence, it is of special interest to find the balance between the 
optimal blending proportion and the possibility of future uses or recy -
cling of the discarded textile articles. 
Alternatives can also consider the production of more resistant and/ 
or higher quality fabrics. In this line, the quality of the products is an 
important parameter that should be considered. The current “ fast- 
fashion ” business model induces a decrease in social and environmental 
Table 1 
Summary of better practices in the textile industry published by Mermaids 
(2018) .  
Issue Better practice Main barriers 
Melt spinning 
process  
- Adjust to preserve fibers ’ 
mechanical properties.  
- Lower temperatures will 
increase the production 
time.  
- Fiber fineness should be 
increased to decrease 
yarn tendency to form 
protruding MFs.  
- Yarn modification will 
alter its characteristics.  
- Fiber irregularities 
increase the friction 
between fibers and avoid 
the release of MFs from 
the yarn. 
Drawing, stretching, 
texturing, 
intermingling and 
drying  
- Adjust to preserve a good 
fiber tensile strength. The 
higher the tensile strength 
of the yarn the lower the 
probability of releasing 
MFs during washing.  
- Process modification 
depends on the client ’ s 
requirements.  
- Length of the fibers 
should not be too low. 
Spinning (yarn)  - Continuous fibers detach 
less MFs than 
discontinuous or staple.  
- Yarn specification 
depends on the client ’ s 
requirements.  
- Plied yarns detach fewer 
MFs than single yarns.  
- High twist yarns detach 
fewer MFs than yarns 
with a lower twist.  
- The lower the linear 
density of the yarn (yarn 
count) the lower the 
number of fibers per 
cross-section the lower 
the release MFs. 
Dyeing  - Avoid garment dyeing as 
it releases more MFs than 
yarn dyeing.  
- The solution is to avoid or 
reduce dyeing. 
Knitting and weaving  - The yarn carrier velocity 
of the knitting may be 
reduced to decrease the 
damage of the fiber.  
- Increase of the production 
time.  
- The quantity or the nature 
of the sizing agent in the 
weaving process could be 
optimized and the 
velocity of the weft 
transporter could be 
reduced.  
- High-density fabrics have 
a tighter structure than 
lower ones, reducing the 
release of MFs.  
- Plain weave fabrics 
detach fewer MFs than 
twill weave ones. 
Mechanical finishing  - The condition in the 
napping process may be 
optimized to reduce the 
mechanical stress on the 
fabric and its weakening.  
- Client requirements.  
- The cut fibers should be 
recollected and managed 
in the factory.  
- Difficulties to adjust the 
equipment.  
- Singeing mechanical 
finishing avoids the MFs 
formation on the fabric 
surface. 
Finishing  - Finishing agents capable 
of protecting the fabric 
surface can be used in this 
process.  
- The agent must be 
compatible with the other 
finishing treatments. 
Manufacturing  - A preliminary washing of 
the textile article can be  
- Textile manufacturing 
mills may not have the  
Table 1 ( continued ) 
Issue Better practice Main barriers 
done before selling it to 
remove the MFs 
generated during textile 
previous processes. 
facilities for industrial 
washing and wastewater 
treatment.  
- Current water treatments 
might not be able of 
collecting the smallest 
MFs.  
F. Belzagui and C. Guti ´errez-Bouz ´an                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Journal of Environmental Management 317 (2022) 115347
4
conditions and produces low-quality garments that are more prone to 
detach MFs ( Peters et al., 2021 ; Zamani et al., 2017 ). Hence, manufac -
turers and consumers can play a key role by investing in garments that 
are manufactured to last more and detach less MFs ( Patagonia, 2018 ). 
Additives can be also considered, for instance, a 90% reduction of the 
MFs release was obtained by applying pectin, poly-lactic acid, and pol -
ybutylene succinate onto polyamide fibers ( De Falco et al., 2019 ; De 
Falco et al., 2018a ). Nonetheless, further investigation is required to 
develop additives able to avoid or reduce the MFs ’ detachment from 
chemically more stable materials (i.e., polyester) but without using toxic 
compounds as, e.g., methanol. For instance, Martel et al. (2002) 
explored the finishing of polyester fabrics with cyclodextrins and poly -
carboxylic acids. The study had no relation with MFs, however, they 
found an easy way with non-toxic chemicals to physically but perma -
nently adhere a coating onto polyester fabrics. This type of studies can 
be assessed to apply them with MFs ’ reduction purposes. 
Many works have studied the coating or surface functionalization of 
fabrics. These investigations can also be furtherly considered as alter -
natives to reduce the MFs pollution and stop them from reaching aquatic 
environments (e.g., Carosio et al., 2014 ; Chen et al., 2012 ; Cireli et al., 
2007 ; Glampedaki et al., 2012 ; Rojas and Azevedo, 2011 ; Trad et al., 
2018 ). Besides, it is equally important to make the additive or process 
sustainable. Using toxic or hazardous compounds or highly energetic 
demanding procedures in the production line could develop worst im -
pacts than the benefits from the reduction of MFs. 
3. Household and industrial washing machines, tumble dryers 
and additives 
To the best of our knowledge, Browne et al. (2011) were the first to 
suggest that the MFs ’ contamination is related to the laundering of 
textile articles. In their publication, they noted that receiving water 
points of sewage effluents contained a higher abundance of MPs when 
compared to other reference sites. Besides, they found that the propor -
tion of polymeric materials found in the sewage effluents were similar to 
the MPs contaminating shore sediments and disposal sites. Subsequent 
investigations verified and quantified the detachment of MFs from 
laundering processes, which is millions of MFs per cycle. In a first esti -
mation, it was calculated that about 0.5 million tons of MFs reach the 
oceans every year ( Boucher and Friot, 2017 ). However, it was later 
noticed that the estimation used a parameter that was 100 – 300 times 
larger than a more proper value. In particular, the linear weight of the 
MFs was considered 300 dtex (1 dtex = 1 g of fiber per 10 000 m), 
whereas the MFs will have a linear weight between 1 and 3 dtex. In this 
sense, Belzagui et al. (2020) re-estimated the MFs ’ flow by applying a 
methodology with new parameters and they obtained 0.3 annual million 
tons of MFs ’ stream to aquatic environments. However, if the ECHA 
definition proposal for MFs is accepted (length 0.003 mm – 15 mm and a 
length/diameter ratio > 3), only Pirc et al. (2016) have evaluated MFs 
sized above 5 mm. In this case, and adding that rayon MFs can also be 
considered as MFs, the amount of MFs detached per laundering reported 
by most of the published articles will be probably underestimated. 
Common clothes and housing linens MFs ’ emissions were studied by 
Galv ˜ao et al. (2020) . They assessed the detachment from a mix of 205 
daily used textiles. They found a MFs release of approximately 3 million 
MFs per kg of washed article. This is in line with all previous studies. 
Besides, they reported that more than 90% of the MFs have a length 
< 500 μ m, with half of them being < 100 μ m. The washing temperature 
and time of the cycles were assessed by Cotton et al. (2020) . They 
compared a “ standard ” washing cycle (40 
◦
C and 85 min) with a 
“ cold-quick ” program (25 
◦
C and 30 min). As expected, they found that 
higher temperatures and longer times significantly increased the MFs ’ 
detachment, reduced the garment longevity and accelerated the color 
loss, which is in line with the work of De Falco et al. (2018b) . However, 
an interesting finding was that when the washing time is increased to a 
certain point, the fabric abrasion (and the MFs ’ release) become stable. 
The estimated time stabilizing point was found at 35 min. However, no 
mechanism explanation was found to this behavior ( Bao et al., 2017 ). 
Furtherly, Dalla et al. (2020) evaluated the MFs ’ detachment from 
100% polyester knitted fabrics with different operational washing con -
ditions. They reported that the operative conditions (program time, 
temperature, speed of centrifugation, number of drum inversions, etc.) 
have a direct impact on the “ stressing ” or friction action on the gar -
ments. In this sense, the minor stress applied to fabrics was seen during 
“ delicate ” program, which were found to decrease the MFs ’ release by 
16% when compared to the “ cotton ” program. However, it must be 
furtherly tested to understand if this is a generalized situation or a 
particular observation achieved in the washer used. If it happens to be a 
generalized condition, the appliance industry could apply these data to 
improve their programs to achieve the reduction of the generation of 
MFs. 
Regarding the type of washers, Hartline et al. (2016) reported that 
top-loading washing machines detach more MFs than front-loading 
ones. As hypothesized by the authors, this may be a consequence of 
the central agitator of the top-loading models. The same study indicates 
that highly populated regions as Asia and North America have a high 
percentage of top-loading washers (90%). Hence, it could partially 
explain the usually big concentration of MFs found in the environment. 
To estimate what could happen if those countries have more front-than 
top-loading washers, Belzagui et al. (2020) studied an inverted scenario 
(10% of top-loading). This modification resulted in a global MFs ’ 
reduction of approximately 30%. This change implies a direct benefit to 
the aquatic systems but also an indirect one to the whole environment. 
However, as mentioned before, further investigation is needed to 
determine if this is a generalized situation or it only applies for the 
washers used in Hartline et al. experiments ( Hartline et al., 2016 ). In this 
sense, improving the designs of washers to cause less friction to the 
garments or the inclusion of built-in MFs ’ filters can be also considered 
as feasible alternatives. By doing so, white goods manufacturers can 
include in their catalogues a qualification class regarding MFs ’ emissions 
of their machines. In this way, consumers will be able to consider this 
factor when acquiring a new washer. 
Concerning the washing additives, there is still big uncertainty about 
their relevance in the detachment of MFs. For instance, Zambrano et al. 
(2019) encountered that the usage of detergent and higher temperature 
conditions showed a significant increase in the detachment rate for 
cotton. In this line, De Falco et al. (2018b) reported that liquid and 
powder detergents increase the MFs ’ release. They also found that 
powder detergents might cause a higher release of MFs due to their 
inorganic and water-insoluble compounds (like zeolite) that can pro -
duce friction to the textiles, and also due to the higher pH of these de -
tergents. However, Napper and Thompson (2016) reported that no clear 
trend was found with the presence of detergent and conditioner, 
although fewer MFs were “ occasionally ” found when no-detergent or 
bio-detergent were applied. Moreover, Salvador et al. (2020) reported 
that the use of liquid detergent reduced the MFs ’ detachment when 
compared with no detergent for synthetic fiber garments (polyester, 
acrylic, and polyamide) but not for cotton ones. In this sense, making an 
extended assessment of the effects of the additives will benefit the 
formulation of new cleaning agents able to protect the garments and 
reduce their MFs ’ detachment. The findings reported by these articles 
are summarized in Table 2 . 
Although most methods shown in Table 2 exhibit similar results, 
there is an urgent need for a standardized analytical method ( Henry 
et al., 2019 ). In this sense, some textile and interdisciplinary coalitions 
are working towards a unique analytical method. Indeed, in a recent 
publication from Tiffin et al. (2021) , they proposed and published the 
validation of a method applying a Gyrowash machine. Besides, an 
inter-laboratory study was executed and they found that the method 
presented good replicability. However, it is important to mention that 
Zambrano et al. (2019) found that accelerated laboratory launderings, 
like those made in a Gyrowash, might release more MFs than household 
F. Belzagui and C. Guti ´errez-Bouz ´an                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Journal of Environmental Management 317 (2022) 115347
5
ones. This could indicate that these types of tests might only be appli -
cable when relative detachment rates are the objective of the assess -
ment. In other words, the absolute outcomes of MFs ’ detachment might 
be evaluated it in real conditions (conventional washers, textile articles 
and additives). 
It should also be considered that each methodology has limitations or 
disadvantages. For instance, Belzagui et al. ’ s (2019) method and similar 
procedures are time-demanding. Besides, visual counting might be 
preferably used when small amounts of garments with strong colors are 
tested. On the other hand, methods such as those proposed by Salvador 
et al. (2020) might not be able to discern between MFs and longer fibers, 
or could erroneously include the mass of the detergent or other impu -
rities in the weighting process of the MFs. To that effect, a method that 
considers different situations, types of samples or requirements will 
probably be needed, for example, one for relative and the other for 
absolute amount of released MFs. 
On the subject of dryers, O ’ Brien et al. (2020) studied the airborne 
emission of MFs from a domestic vented dryer. They found that the lint 
emission corresponded to approximately 0.012% of the garment mass 
dried. Kapp and Miller (2020) also studied the MFs emission from 
dryers. They collected the MFs vented to the surroundings of the 
experiment site and provided the results in different units for further 
comparability. In this sense, they reported averages from 35 mg to 70 
mg of lint from three consecutive dry cycles. In addition ( Mahbub and 
Shams, 2022 ), reported that the MFs release was promoted by longer 
drying times. As can be seen, these studies confirmed that MFs can 
escape the lint trap of the dryers and therefore should be considered as a 
source of MPs to the environment. However, further investigation is 
needed to assess the detachment rate from these machines. In this sense, 
clothes tumble dryers can also be modified to be more efficient 
regarding the MFs ’ generation. For instance, TeGrotenhuis et al. (2017) 
proposed a hybrid heat pump dryer that could achieve savings in both 
energy and drying cycles, providing an indirect reduction of the MFs 
generated. 
3.1. Devices to reduce the MFs in the effluents of the laundering 
equipment 
There are commercially available devices to reduce the release of 
MFs from washers. These might work by reducing the MFs either inside 
the washing machine [in-drum devices such as GuppyFriend (2021) or 
Cora Ball (2021) ], or at the effluent [external filters as Lint LUV-R 
(2021) or PlanetCare (2021) ]. These devices work differently when 
reducing the concentration of MFs in the washers ’ effluent. GuppyFriend 
and analogous systems work basically to protect the garments from the 
mechanical stress generated in the washing process. Hence, it is ex -
pected that they will reduce the generation of MFs. In contrast, external 
filters and the Cora Ball act by retaining the already generated MFs. It 
must be noticed that these devices might be complementary between 
them to achieve a higher reduction of the MFs. 
According to McIlwraith et al. (2019) , these technologies can 
accomplish a MFs ’ reduction in the washer effluent from 26% ( Cora Ball) 
to 87% ( Lint LUV-R filter). Additionally, no significant difference for the 
MFs length when using the Cora Ball was reported, suggesting that this 
device captures MFs in a wide range of sizes. Meanwhile, Napper et al. 
(2020) reported that the external device XFiltra (2021) was the most 
successful in retaining MFs, followed by the in-drum GuppyFriend . For 
the XFiltra , two main explanations were given: a finest mesh pore in 
contrast with other similar devices (60 μ m vs > 175 μ m), and the use of 
an integrated electrical pump to facilitate the flow through the mesh. On 
the other hand, PlanetCare filter sustains more than 90% of MFs ’ 
Table 2 
Published works regarding the MFs ’ detachment in industrial and household 
laundering.  
Work Analytical method/Comments Results 
Browne et al. 
(2011)  
- No clear information on the 
methodology used. 
130 – 280 MFs/L per 
garment 
> 1900 MFs/garment  - Conservative estimations 
reported. 
Napper and 
Thompson 
(2016)  
- Indirect method 
(a)
. 140 000 – 730 000 MFs/6 
kg of washed garments 
500 000 MFs/mg  
- Fibers with a mean length > 5 mm 
considered 
(b)
. 
Pirc et al. 
(2016)  
- Indirect method 
(a)
. 135 000 MFs/6 kg of 
washed garments  - Filters of 200 μ m.  
- Mean length considered > 5 mm. 
Hartline et al. 
(2016)  
- Indirect method 
(a)
. 29 – 431 mg of MFs/ 
garment-washed (front- 
load) 
1471 – 2121 mg of MFs/ 
garment washed (top- 
load) 
Carney Almroth 
et al., 2018  
- Gyrowash one bath 815/8 
according to modified SS-EN ISO 
105-C06. 
7360 MFs/(m
2 
L) for PES 
fleece 
87 MFs/(m
2 
L) for 
knitted PES  - Commercial liquid detergent. 
Salvador (2017)  - Used Napper and Thompson 
(2016) and Pirc et al. (2016) 
methods. 
184 000 – 250 000 MFs/ 
garment 
De Falco et al. 
(2018b)  
- Linitest apparatus used to 
simulate washing machine. 
6 000 000 – 17 700 000 
MFs/5 kg of washed 
garments  
- Direct quantification. 0.43 – 1.27 g of MFs 
Belzagui et al. 
(2019)  
- Commercial front-load washer. 1 000 000 – 6 500 000 
MFs for 6 kg of washed 
garments  
- Quantification of the MFs by 
visual counting. 
30 000 – 230 000 MFs/ 
garment  
- Polyamide 20 μ m filter. 2 – 29 mg of MFs/garment 
washed  
- Indirect method to estimate the 
weight of the MFs (applying the 
diameter and density). 
1200 – 33 000 MFs/(m
2 
L) 
Zambrano et al. 
(2019)  
- AATCC standard SDL Atlas 
Launder-Ometer. 
Mass lost during 
accelerated laundering : 
0.2 – 4.0 mg MFs/g 
(cellulose-based fabrics) 
0.1 – 1.0 mg MFs/g 
(polyester fabric)  
- Whatman glass 1.2 μ m filter.  
- HiRes Fiber Quality Analyzer 
(FQA) for MFs ’ quantification.  
- 25
◦
C and 44
◦
C.  
- AATCC 135 – 2015 with Washing 
machine  
- Nylon 20 μ m and then Whatman 
glass 1.2 μ m filter. 
Salvador et al. 
(2020)  
- Commercial top washer used in 
the experiments. 
% of lost garment weight 
from 10 cycles : 
0.16 to 0.20 (100% 
cotton) 
0.07 to 0.13 (100% 
acrylic) 
0.03 to 0.06 (100% 
polyester) 
0.04 to 0.10 (100% 
polyamide)  
- Subsequent steel sieves 500 μ m 
and 65 μ m.  
- Indirect method to estimate the 
weight of the MFs (applying the 
diameter, linear weight, and 
density). 
Galv ˜ao et al. 
(2020)  
- Clothing and housing linens from 
a household of 4 people. 
18 000 000 MFs for 6 kg 
of washed garments  
- Commercial front-loading 
washer.  
- Aliquots of 20 mL were filtered 
through 12 μ m nitrocellulose 
membrane filters  
- MFs were visually counted in one 
quadrant of the filter and 
extrapolated. 
Dalla et al. 
(2020)  
- 100% PES knitted fabrics. 36.60 mg/kg (cotton 
program) 
32.51 mg/kg (delicate/ 
silk program with liquid 
stain remover) 
33.86 mg/kg (delicate/ 
silk program.)  
- Pre-washing before experiments.  
- Commercial washer, detergent, 
and softener used.  
- Effluent was filtered through 40 
μ m pore.  
- Different programs tested. 
(a) Indirect method: the quantification is estimated from the weight, length, 
and/or density of the MFs. 
(b) According to the ECHA, fibers with a length < 15 mm and a maximum 
diameter of 5 mm should be considered as MFs. 
F. Belzagui and C. Guti ´errez-Bouz ´an                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Journal of Environmental Management 317 (2022) 115347
6
retention efficiency for their product, which is not consistent with the 
25% retention reported by Napper et al. (2020) . The results of these 
studies are summarized in Fig. 2 . 
As can be seen in Fig. 2 , different results are reported for the same 
devices. Hence, further experimental inter-laboratory replications are 
required. The introduction into the market of these options seems 
feasible in the short-to medium-term period. Nevertheless, the final 
disposal of the retained MFs is an urgent concern not addressed yet. For 
instance, as commented by Napper et al. (2020) , once the filters are 
cleaned by collecting the MFs, these can be “ thrown into the everyday 
household waste ” . In this sense, depending on the final disposition given 
to that specific waste, the MFs could also finish in water environments, 
turning the devices just into a mere MFs ’ “ by-pass ” . 
The usage or final disposition of the MFs has been poorly studied. For 
instance, Yousef et al. (2021) have proposed the use of lint from 
household dryers as a source of renewable energy through pyrolysis. 
They found that lint can produce an activation energy higher than the 
textile waste as a result of its high purity, chemical composition, and 
uniform size, which facilitates the conversion process. However, it must 
be noticed that many of the lint materials, like polyester, will not have a 
renewable origin. In this sense, this fossil-based waste should not be 
considered as a renewable energy source. Besides, there is a logistic issue 
that needs further consideration to transport this waste. A good idea 
would be to persuade the users who have a MFs ’ retention system to take 
them to a MFs “ disposal ” site, from where these could be collected and 
submitted to a future final disposal treatment facility. In this sense, we 
can make an analogy with gases ’ emissions. There are diffuse emissions 
(cars – household laundering), which are harder to treat, and point 
sources which are easier (fabrics – textile industries). In this line, a good 
alternative could be to reuse them when these are collected in industries 
(point sources) and to immobilize them in treating facilities when these 
are retained in household launderings (diffuse sources). 
Currently, textile articles are washed even if they are not dirty, which 
implicates a futile use of water and energy resources ( Stawreberg and 
Wikstr ¨om, 2011 ). Hence, an effective and obvious method to reduce the 
MFs ’ shedding is to wash them only when it ’ s required. For instance, in a 
hypothetical situation simulated in the work of Belzagui et al. (2020) , a 
reduction of 30% on the generation of MFs can be achieved by reducing 
the laundering water consumption in the regions with a higher con -
sumption rate (which is 19 m
3
/washer per year). In other words, doing 
shorter washing cycles or washing less generates fewer MFs. This mea -
sure can be accomplished by instructing consumers to use adequate 
laundry programs and/or more efficient washers. This strategy can be 
implemented in the short-to medium-term to reduce the MFs ’ genera -
tion. Consequently, this will decrease the emission of MFs to the whole 
environment, affecting especially to the usage and contamination of 
water ecosystems. 
It must be noticed that “ washing less ” is very subjective. For this 
reason, there are some guides to provide sufficient knowledge to con -
sumers about when and how to wash their clothes. For instance, re -
ported “ better practices ” are: filling up the washing machine, using 
liquid detergents, selecting colder and quicker laundry settings, among 
others ( Cotton et al., 2020 ; De Falco et al., 2018a ; Mermaids, 2017 ; 
Plastic Pollution Coalition, 2017 ). This could be strengthened with 
textile campaigns indicating how many “ normal ” uses are appropriate 
for a determined garment before washing. In this way, the population 
aware about the reduction of MFs generation must be continuously 
reinforced. Social networks are strong tools that are constantly making 
publications on this topic ( GESAMP, 2015b ; SAPEA, 2019 ; Wagner and 
Lambert, 2018 ); however, environmental education should be guaran -
teed from the early stages of our education, and MFs should be a part of 
this education. 
Regarding the mass or quantity of garments washed per cycle, in a 
quick experiment made in our laboratory to measure the MFs ’ detach -
ment, polyester fabrics were independently submitted to one washing 
cycle at equal conditions (Fagor Innovation F-2180 washer, 40 
◦
C, 1000 
RPM, 57 min, and 59 L of effluent). The textiles used were identical 
fabrics but differing in their weight and dimension; two weighted 0.13 
kg, while the other pair weighted 3.00 kg (4 samples in total). Each 
sample was washed with liquid detergent. In this case, the contrast was 
from a washer occupation of 25% – 70% in volume and from 20% to 50% 
in weight. The relation between the mass of garments is about 23 (3.00 
Fig. 2. Microfibers ’ reduction at the effluents of the washing machines.  
F. Belzagui and C. Guti ´errez-Bouz ´an                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Journal of Environmental Management 317 (2022) 115347
7
kg/0.13 kg), while the relation between the mass of the MFs detached 
was seen to be approximately 5 (0.025 g/0.005 g). The reduction of the 
MFs could be a consequence of a decrease in the friction between the 
textile articles and the washer drum. Besides, this quick experiment 
verified what is said in the “ Mermaids good practice guide ” ( Mermaids, 
2017 ): filling up the washing machine considerably reduces the MFs 
detachment. 
4. Municipal, industrial, and drinking water treatment plants 
This section discusses the MFs and MPs found in water treatment 
plants (WTPs) and water products. The addressed perspective is to 
inform about the concentrations typically encountered in the effluents, 
the effectiveness of the different technologies for the MPs ’ removal, and 
the effects of the MPs on the treatments. 
4.1. Drinking water treatment plants 
It has been published that the consumption of bottled and tap water 
is a source of ingestion of MFs ( Ossmann, 2021 ). The average concen -
trations reported were 94 MPs/L for bottles and 32 MPs/L for tap water 
( Eerkes-Medrano et al., 2019 ; Koelmans et al., 2019 ; Mintenig et al., 
2019 ; Schymanski et al., 2018 ). Cox et al. (2019) estimated that the 
annual MPs ’ intake could be 52 × 10
3 
items. However, it may raise to 90 
× 10
3 
MPs if only bottled water is consumed. Kosuth et al. (2018) found 
that most of the particles were MFs (98%). Regarding the size, Ossmann 
et al. (2018) reported that over 90% of the MPs found in bottle water 
corresponded to particles smaller than 5 μ m, which are smaller than the 
mean 960 μ m reported by Kosuth et al. (2018) for tap water. Hence, 
drinking WTPs are not completely effective in eliminating MPs, whether 
as for uncompleted retention or as for an “ in-situ ” generation. 
In this line, Wang et al. (2020) reported that the overall MPs ’ 
removal from different technologies in drinking WTPs was from 82% to 
89%. On the other hand, Zhang et al. (2020a , 2020b) found a low 
retention of micro- and nanoparticles ( < 2%), with an increase of 16% 
when applying a coagulant aid. Works from Ma et al. (2019a , 2019b) 
also reported low retention efficiencies (from 1% to 8%) at coagulants ’ 
conventional dosages. Hence, there is a need to mend these contradic -
tions. Regarding the ultrafiltration process, it has been reported as the 
most effective process for MFs ’ removal ( Ma et al., 2019a ; Zhang et al., 
2020b ). Sand filtration was also tested but it was not considered to play 
a primary role in removing MPs. A key finding was that drinking WTPs 
can also act as a source of MPs. In this specific case, greater concen -
trations of polyacrylamide (PAM) were detected in the effluent 
compared to the raw water. PAM is used as a component of the coagu -
lant used in the process. In this sense, more investigation is needed to 
evaluate if the presence of MPs and MFs in drinking water is due to the 
physical degradation of the plastic bottles or the water treatment itself 
( Ossmann, 2021 ). 
4.2. Used water treatment plants 
In municipal or industrial used-WTPs, a proportion of the incoming 
MFs will be transferred into the sludge throughout the consecutive 
treatments. It is important to notice that WTPs should not be considered 
as a source of MPs and MFs but a pathway where they can be removed 
from the liquid stream. Globally, the percentage of municipal used- 
waters that are subjected to any kind of management is approximately 
20% ( ONU, 2017 ; Pham and Kuy, 2013 ). Populations connected to 
urban WTPs are markedly variated across the countries. For instance, 
South American and Asian countries treat around 20% of their munic -
ipal waters, while Central European countries have achieved a 97% of 
treatment coverage ( EEA, 2017 ; Mara, 2004 ). WTPs are considered 
significant pathways for all types of MPs to aquatic and soil environ -
ments ( Raju et al., 2020 ; Rolsky et al., 2020 ). Yet, as mentioned before, 
fiber-shaped ones coming from the laundering of textile articles are 
within the most encountered types in these streams. 
Regarding the material, polyester MFs usually surpass other types of 
MPs ( Browne et al., 2011 ; Lares et al., 2018 ; Magnusson et al., 2016 ; 
Murphy et al., 2016 ; Sun et al., 2019 ). Currently, polyester is the top 
synthetic material used by the textile industry. Besides, as pointed out by 
a series of publications, regardless of the material, each textile article 
detaches thousands to millions of MFs in every domestic washing cycle 
( Belzagui et al., 2019 ; De Falco et al., 2018b ; Folk ¨o, 2015 ; Hartline et al., 
2016 ; Pirc et al., 2016 ). For instance, Alavian Petroody et al. (2020) 
reported that most of the MPs found in a WTP were in the form of MFs, 
from which polyester was the most abundant, followed by polyamide 
and acrylic fibers. This makes sense, as an important part of the MPs 
entering a WTP will come from the household washers ’ effluents. 
Following the current data, it has been estimated that 0.48 million tons 
of MFs are globally generated in domestic washers, from where 0.20 
million tons might be retained in WTPs ’ sludge and 0.28 million tons 
might reach aquatic environments ( Belzagui et al., 2020 ). 
In primary treatments, raw water usually passes through a set of 
screenings. If fine screens are applied (2.5 – 10 mm), MPs > 2.5 mm can 
be removed from the water but not completely because of the 
morphology of these particles (big length to diameter ratio). Next, grit 
removal, flotation, and primary settlement could also retain MPs with 
different densities than water ( Sun et al., 2019 ). Primary treatments are 
effective to retain MFs as these might be adsorbed, aggregated, and 
entrapped in flocculating particles and separated by sedimentation ( Sun 
et al., 2019 ; Wei et al., 2019c ). An important removal of the MFs can 
happen in this stage. In some cases, MPs ’ removal was found to be even 
greater than 90% ( Lares et al., 2018 ). Secondary treatments, as activated 
sludge, are basically biological processes that degrade organic pollut -
ants. Here, MPs can be retained by the extracellular polymer substances 
secreted by microorganisms and furtherly removed with the generated 
sludge; i.e., MPs are transferred to the sludge ( Sun et al., 2019 ). In 
general, as reported in Bakaraki Turan et al. (2021) , most of the MPs ’ 
and MFs ’ removal is made in the primary and secondary treatments. 
Finally, advanced treatments as coagulation and filtration, ultrafiltra -
tion, or membrane bioreactors can remove part of the remaining and 
lower-sized MPs. As can be seen in Fig. 3 , the retention and transfer rates 
might depend on the treatment applied. From different studies ( Alavian 
Petroody et al., 2020 ; Blair et al., 2019 ; Carr et al., 2016 ; Franco et al., 
2020 ; Gasperi et al., 2015 ; Gies et al., 2018 ; Gündo ˘gdu et al., 2018 ; Lares 
et al., 2018 ; Leslie et al., 2017 ; Magni et al., 2019 ; Magnusson and 
Nor ´en, 2014 ; Michielssen et al., 2016 ; Mintenig et al., 2017 ; Murphy 
et al., 2016 ; Talvitie et al., 2015 ; Talvitie et al., 2017a , 2017b ; Zhang 
et al., 2021 ; Zhou et al., 2020 ), it can be stated that the MPs ’ and MFs ’ 
transfer efficiency will be between 76% and 98%. 
For instance, Lares et al. (2018) reported that 99% of the MPs were 
removed in the primary treatment; afterward, a slight increase of the 
MPs ’ concentration (0.6 – 1 MPs/L) was found in the effluent of the 
activated sludge. This behavior might be a consequence of the sampling 
procedure, which didn ’ t consider the different flows (turbulent and 
stable) that are found in each effluent. Hence, superficial sampling 
might retain more buoyant MPs when having a stable flux. MPs with a 
density higher than water will be mostly retained in primary and sec -
ondary treatments, whilst advanced treatments will eliminate floating 
particles from the final water effluent ( Nizzetto et al., 2016 ). In this line, 
Bayo et al. (2020) found that particulate shapes were more prone (95%) 
to be retained than fiber ones (55%) in membrane bioreactors (MBR) 
and rapid sand filtration (RSF). It should be noticed that MFs might have 
an easier pass through RSFs as a consequence of their longitudinal shape 
and small diameters (⁓10 μ m) ( Hamidian et al., 2021 ). Edo et al. (2020) 
reported that sizes between 25 and 104 μ m were predominant in the 
effluents of primary and secondary treatments, strengthening the 
conclusion that smaller and fiber-shaped MPs are more prone to be 
found in the effluents of WTPs ( Li et al., 2020b ; Raju et al., 2020 ). 
Despite having a relatively high retention efficiency, these facilities 
treat millions of liters every day, releasing high amounts of MFs ( Sun 
F. Belzagui and C. Guti ´errez-Bouz ´an                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Journal of Environmental Management 317 (2022) 115347
8
et al., 2019 ). Also, as previously explained, the proportion of treated 
waters is still very low across the world, and it must be noticed that other 
sources of textile MFs (as garments ’ hand-washing) will be still left aside 
from these treatments. Equally important is that these particles can still 
enter the environment via the final disposal of the sludge, as conven -
tional treatments don ’ t remove sludge-based MPs (Z. Chen et al., 2020 ). 
The reported abundance of MPs in the sludge varies from 1.5 × 10
3 
to 
180 × 10
3 
particles per kg of dry weight sludge ( Edo et al., 2020 ; Lares 
et al., 2018 ; Li et al., 2020b ). Hence, MFs might still be dumped into the 
environment if the sludge is used as, e.g., an agricultural fertilizer ( Bayo 
et al., 2016 ; Corradini et al., 2019 ; Li et al., 2018 ; Mahon et al., 2017 ). 
The existence of WTPs was estimated to play a relevant role to 
transfer MFs from the liquid stream into the sludge. According to Bel -
zagui et al. (2020) , a global 30% reduction of MFs reaching aquatic 
environments can be achieved by increasing regions with a low per -
centage ( < 50%) of treated water to 60%. However, as pointed out in 
that study, further investigation is required to develop treatments for the 
MPs and MFs retained in the sludge. Yet, it must be noticed that 
installing only primary treatments in places without WTPs could help to 
remove an important proportion of the incoming MPs and MFs from the 
liquid stream. 
As previously indicated, the amount of MFs annually retained in the 
sludge of WTPs is about 0.20 million tons ( Belzagui et al., 2020 ). Also, a 
publication estimated that the yearly amount of MPs entering agricul -
tural lands from sludge might be between 63 × 10
3 
to 430 × 10
3 
and 44 
× 10
3 
to 300 × 10
3 
tons in Europe and North America, respectively 
( Nizzetto et al., 2016 ). In this latter study, other sources of MPs, as 
particles collected by sewers, were also considered in the estimation. 
Partial removal of these fibers can be achieved by sieving and sifting 
procedures, however, a complete separation will not be possible 
( Weithmann et al., 2018 ). A recent promising strategy to reduce the 
MPs ’ concentration from the sludge is the hyperthermophilic compost -
ing technology (hTC), which was demonstrated to reduce 45% of the 
MPs after 45 days of treatment at a full-scale trial (Z. Chen et al., 2020 ). 
Regarding passive treatments, Sarkar et al. (2021) studied the MPs ’ 
and MFs ’ pollution in freshwater wetland systems used for wastewater 
treatment. They estimated a MPs ’ removal of 50%, which is far lower 
than most conventional primary treatments. Besides, an important 
aspect to consider is that they identified variable amounts of heavy 
metals (As, Cd, Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb, Zn), ranging from 2.03 μ g of arsenic per 
gram for MPs to 191.01 μ g of zinc per gram of MPs. Fishes in the wetland 
ponds were also contaminated with MPs and heavy metals. In this sense, 
they concluded that natural wetlands are facing the risk of MPs pollu -
tion, where MPs have gotten to the trophic state hindering and stressing 
the wetland system. This article is in line with Li et al. (2020b) , who 
reported an abundance of 5.5 × 10
3 
MPs per m
3 
of water in a freshwater 
mangrove. However, as stated by Kumar et al. (2021) , the number of 
MPs in wetlands will depend on various factors, such as the location, 
proximity to urban settlements, human interference, among others. The 
MPs ’ removal in natural wetlands could be very helpful for economically 
under-developed countries. In any event, it is evident that retaining the 
MFs before reaching WTPs will reduce their contamination to the 
environment, i.e., short-to medium-term alternatives as washers ’ filters 
can be a good alliance to reduce the flow of these pollutants either to 
water, soil or atmospheric ecosystems. 
4.3. Effects of MPs and MFs on water treatment plants 
It has been reported that MPs in biological treatment might reduce 
the abundance of the bacteria that is needed for the processes of nitri -
fication, denitrification, among others. For instance, some MPs might 
inhibit the sludge anaerobic digestion in all its phases; hydrolysis, 
acidogenesis, acetogenesis, hydrogen, and methane production ( Wei 
et al., 2019a , 2019b ; Zhang et al., 2020a ; Zhang and Chen, 2020 ). In 
some cases, depending on the polymer, the effects might have different 
origins. In this regard, polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and poly -
ethylene (PE) induce the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS, as 
OH
•
or H
2
O
2
). PET and Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) can release bisphenol-A 
(BPA) and di-n-butyl phthalate (DBP), respectively, both being toxic 
compounds ( Wei et al., 2019a , 2019b , 2019c ). Minimum concentrations 
for the effect were established at 10, 20, and 100 MP/g for PET, PVC, 
and PE, respectively, which are realistic concentrations found in sludge 
samples ( Li et al., 2018 ; Wei et al., 2019c ). On the other hand, poly -
styrene nanoparticles affected the microbial community structures by 
reducing the cumulative methane production by 15% ( Fu et al., 2018 ). 
Regarding polyester MFs, Li et al. (2020a) found a reduction of methane 
production for several concentrations. Yet, the inhibition was lower than 
with other tested polymers. Also, Qin et al. (2020) tested with poly -
ethersulfone MPs, and it was found that these particles slightly reduced 
the removal of ammonia nitrogen. In this sense, it is also important to 
have a better understanding of the effects that MPs and MFs will have on 
the biota of WTPs. For instance, if the potential damage is elevated, it 
will be necessary to remove them as much as possible before reaching 
WTPs. 
5. Gaps, criteria, and phases of the solutions 
As in every environmental issue, the solutions must fulfill a minimal 
Fig. 3. Percentage of retained microplastics and microfibers in a used-water treatment plant.  
F. Belzagui and C. Guti ´errez-Bouz ´an                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Journal of Environmental Management 317 (2022) 115347
9
set of conditions to be considered practical and to provide a positive net 
effect on the environment. Some of these criteria are mentioned 
hereafter:  
1. An effective solution should avoid producing secondary issues when 
tackling the main concern. There are many ways to produce sec -
ondary problems, for instance, high energy and resources re -
quirements, the usage of toxic or hazardous substances, among 
others. For example, the application of toxic compounds in the 
process could imply the subsequent event of environmental 
contamination (e.g., the use of methanol for producing textile coat -
ings). Or, including washable coatings to textile articles could imply 
an increase of the BOD at the effluent discharging areas. In this sense, 
it could be of particular interest to perform a Life Cycle Assessment 
(LCA) for each MFs ’ processing or retaining system.  
2. Alternatives should also seek the possibility of closing the gap of the 
MFs. In this line, some devices have shown great effectiveness in 
retaining MFs in washing machines. However, the interrogative of 
the posterior treatment must be equally and urgently solved.  
3. The treatments or alternatives must be scalable. This is particularly 
complex in the manufacturing process of textile articles and the 
treatment of municipal waters. To better illustrate this, it must be 
noticed that the manufacturing of textiles is produced at uncountable 
points around the globe. In the same line, municipal waters are still 
poorly treated in terms of the worldwide proportion, being approx -
imately 80% of the waters discharged to the environment without 
any treatment. On the other hand, including devices in the washing 
machines could be easier in the short- and medium-terms.  
4. In the case of devices intended for the users ’ application, these must 
be practical and easy to handle. The higher the device complexity the 
lower will be the implication of the users. This is furtherly explained 
in the work of Herweyers et al. (2020) .  
5. The economical parameter is also an important aspect to ponder. 
Unless policies or regulations (laws) to reduce this contamination are 
created, devices and/or processes should not exceed a “ critical ” 
economical point in order to promote the users ’ engagement. 
In this line, Herweyers et al. (2020) assessed the consumers ’ per -
ceptions and attitudes toward systems preventing MFs pollution. With 
this purpose, they determined the optimum requirement for these sys -
tems through a consumer survey. They found that the MFs ’ problem and 
peoples ’ washing behavior are underestimated. Besides, they con -
structed a minimal set of requirements from a user point of view, which 
are summarized next: 
i. The solution must be effective and preferably visually experi -
enced by the users so they can recognize their positive perfor -
mance towards a cleaner environment.  
ii. It must be durable and ensure long-term usage, i.e., disposable 
solutions should not be considered.  
ii. The usage or installation of the product should be easy.  
iv. People from all socio-economic levels should be able to acquire 
the product.  
v. In case of a cleaning requirement of the product, it should be fast 
and user-friendly. The achievable amount of cleaning periods was 
found to be at every 15 – 17 washing cycles with a cleaning 
duration of 10 min. 
Also, further research is needed to investigate the possibilities to 
close the loop for the collected MFs. There are a lot of gaps still to be 
solved and to be investigated, as the MFs emitted to the air from the 
daily usage of the garments, or ways to immobilize or use the retained 
MFs. However, it must be noticed that there are environmental issues for 
all the life cycle of the garments. For instance, as reported by the Ellen 
MacArthur Foundation, less than 1% of the material used to manufac -
ture garments is recycled into new garments ( Ellen MacArthur 
Foundation, 2017 ). In this sense, the MFs are one of the missing pieces to 
be solved in order to make the textile industry more sustainable, but 
further investigation is needed to develop new ideas or to improve 
already existing ones. 
6. Conclusions 
Many alternatives are available to reduce textile microfibers from 
reaching the environment. Some options are currently more viable in the 
short- and medium-term periods. The textile industry has the potential 
to drastically reduce the generation of microfibers by improving their 
processes or products. This could imply that downstream solutions 
might be dispensable or less severe. However, there are many small- and 
medium-sized textile industries around the globe, making this alterna -
tive feasible only in the long-term time. Also, there are currently some 
solutions for washers. These can reduce at least 30% of the microfibers ’ 
emissions from household laundry. Besides, new products as detergents 
or additives are being developed to reduce the generation of these 
particles. 
On the other hand, water treatment plants can partially remove the 
microfibers from the liquid stream and retain them in the sludge. 
Depending on the technology applied, these facilities can remove up to 
99% of the microfibers. Yet, the problem is still transferred to the sludge. 
In addition, installing these facilities is a long-term alternative. An 
important gap in every alternative is the final disposition or treatment of 
the microfibers. It is important to clarify that any solution must consider 
the whole process to certify that it is environmentally friendly and will 
not pollute more than the microfibers. Yet, it is very likely that the al -
ternatives will be complementary between them, i.e., there will be no 
single solution for the microfiber pollution. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors acknowledge the support of the “ Secretaria d ’ Universitats 
i Recerca del Departament d ’ Empresa i Coneixement de la Generalitat de 
Catalunya ” for funding this project. 
References 
Abidli, S., Lahbib, Y., Trigui El Menif, N., 2019. Microplastics in commercial molluscs 
from the lagoon of Bizerte (Northern Tunisia). Mar. Pollut. Bull. 142 (March), 
243 – 252. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2019.03.048 . 
Alavian Petroody, S.S., Hashemi, S.H., van Gestel, C.A.M., 2020. Factors affecting 
microplastic retention and emission by a wastewater treatment plant on the southern 
coast of Caspian Sea. Chemosphere 261, 128179. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chemosphere.2020.128179 . 
Allary, T., 2021. Future fashion. Ind. Biotechnol. 17 (4) https://doi.org/10.1089/ 
ind.2021.29260.tal . 
Bakaraki Turan, N., Sari Erkan, H., Onkal Engin, G., 2021. Microplastics in wastewater 
treatment plants: occurrence, fate and identification. Process Saf. Environ. Protect. 
146, 77 – 84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2020.08.039 . 
Ball, Cora, 2021. The Cora Ball. https://coraball.com/ . 
Bao, W., Gong, R.H., Ding, X., Xue, Y., Li, P., Fan, W., 2017. Optimizing a laundering 
program for textiles in a front-loading washing machine and saving energy. J. Clean. 
Prod. 148, 415 – 421. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.01.161 . 
Barrett, J., Chase, Z., Zhang, J., Holl, M.M.B., Willis, K., Williams, A., Hardesty, B.D., 
Wilcox, C., Pennino, M.G., 2020. Microplastic pollution in deep-sea sediments from 
the great Australian bight. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2020.576170 , 7-October- 
1-10.  
Bayo, J., Olmos, S., L ´opez-Castellanos, J., Alcolea, A., 2016. Microplastics and 
microfibers in the sludge of a municipal wastewater treatment plant. Int. J. Sustain. 
Dev. Plann. 11 (5), 812 – 821. https://doi.org/10.2495/SDP-V11-N5-812-821 . 
Bayo, Javier, L ´opez-Castellanos, J., Olmos, S., 2020. Membrane bioreactor and rapid 
sand filtration for the removal of microplastics in an urban wastewater treatment 
plant. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 156 (March), 111211. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
marpolbul.2020.111211 . 
F. Belzagui and C. Guti ´errez-Bouz ´an                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Journal of Environmental Management 317 (2022) 115347
10
Belzagui, F., Crespi, M., 
´
Alvarez, A., Guti ´errez-Bouz ´an, C., Vilaseca, M., 2019. 
Microplastics ’ emissions: microfibers ’ detachment from textile garments. Environ. 
Pollut. 248, 1028 – 1035. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2019.02.059 . 
Belzagui, F., Guti ´errez-Bouz ´an, C., 
´
Alvarez-S ´anchez, A., Vilaseca, M., 2020. Textile 
microfibers reaching aquatic environments: a new estimation approach. Environ. 
Pollut. 265 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2020.114889 . 
Blair, R.M., Waldron, S., Gauchotte-lindsay, C., 2019. Average daily flow of microplastics 
through a tertiary wastewater treatment plant over a ten-month period. Water Res. 
163, 114909. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2019.114909 . 
Boucher, J., Friot, D., 2017. Primary Microplastics in the Oceans: A Global Evaluation of 
Sources. IUCN. https://doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.CH.2017.01.en . 
Browne, M.A., Crump, P., Niven, S.J., Teuten, E., Tonkin, A., Galloway, T., Thompson, R., 
2011. Accumulation of microplastic on shorelines woldwide: sources and sinks. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 45, 9175 – 9179. https://doi.org/10.1021/es201811s . 
Browne, M.A., Rochman, C.M., Browne, M.A., Halpern, B.S., Hentschel, B.T., Hoh, E., 
Karapanagioti, H.K., Rios-Mendoza, L.M., Takada, H., Teh, S., Thompson, R.C., 2013. 
Policy: classify plastic waste as hazardous. Nature 494 (7436), 169 – 171. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/494169a . 
Bullon, J., Gonz ´alez Arrieta, A., Hern ´andez Encinas, A., Queiruga Dios, A., 2017. 
Manufacturing processes in the textile industry. Expert Systems for fabrics 
production. ADCAIJ: Adv. Distr. Comput. Artif. Intell. J. 6 (4), 15 – 23. https://doi. 
org/10.14201/adcaij2017641523 . 
Carney Almroth, B.M., Åstr ¨om, L., Roslund, S., Petersson, H., Johansson, M., Persson, N. 
K., 2018. Quantifying shedding of synthetic fibers from textiles; a source of 
microplastics released into the environment. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Control Ser. 25 (2), 
1191 – 1199. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-017-0528-7 . 
Carosio, F., Blasio, A. Di, Cuttica, F., Alongi, J., Malucelli, G., Applicata, S., Torino, P., 
Unit, L.I., Michel, V.T., 2014. Flame retardancy of polyester and polyester   cotton 
blends treated with caseins. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 53, 3917 – 3923. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/ie404089t . 
Carr, S.A., Liu, J., Tesoro, A.G., 2016. Transport and fate of microplastic particles in 
wastewater treatment plants. Water Res. 91, 174 – 182. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
watres.2016.01.002 . 
Chen, L., Wang, C., Tian, A., Wu, M., 2012. An attempt of improving polyester inkjet 
printing performance by surface modification using b-cyclodextrin. Surf. Interface 
Anal. 1324 – 1330. https://doi.org/10.1002/sia.5023 . May.  
Chen, Z., Zhao, W., Xing, R., Xie, S., Yang, X., Cui, P., Lü, J., Liao, H., Yu, Z., Wang, S., 
Zhou, S., 2020. Enhanced in situ biodegradation of microplastics in sewage sludge 
using hyperthermophilic composting technology. J. Hazard Mater. 384 (September 
2019), 121271. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2019.121271 . 
Chen, G., Li, Y., Wang, J., 2021. Occurrence and ecological impact of microplastics in 
aquaculture ecosystems. Chemosphere 274, 129989. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chemosphere.2021.129989 . 
Cireli, A., Kutlu, B., Mutlu, M., 2007. Surface modification of polyester and polyamide 
fabrics by low frequency plasma polymerization of acrylic acid. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
104, 2318 – 2322. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.25701 . 
Collignon, A., Hecq, J.H., Glagani, F., Voisin, P., Collard, F., Goffart, A., 2012. Neustonic 
microplastic and zooplankton in the north western Mediterranean sea. Mar. Pollut. 
Bull. 64 (4), 861 – 864. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2012.01.011 . 
Corradini, F., Meza, P., Eguiluz, R., Casado, F., Huerta-Lwanga, E., Geissen, V., 2019. 
Evidence of microplastic accumulation in agricultural soils from sewage sludge 
disposal. Sci. Total Environ. 671, 411 – 420. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2019.03.368 . 
Cotton, L., Hayward, A.S., Lant, N.J., Blackburn, R.S., 2020. Improved garment longevity 
and reduced microfibre release are important sustainability benefits of laundering in 
colder and quicker washing machine cycles. Dyes Pigments 177, 108120. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.dyepig.2019.108120 . 
Cox, K.D., Covernton, G.A., Davies, H.L., Dower, J.F., Juanes, F., Dudas, S.E., 2019. 
Human Consumption of Microplastics. Environmental Science & Technology. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.9b01517 acs.est.9b01517.  
Dalla, G., Mossotti, R., Montarsolo, A., 2020. Assessment of microplastics release from 
polyester fabrics: the impact of different washing conditions. Environ. Pollut. 264, 
113960. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2020.113960 . 
De Falco, F., Gentile, G., Avolio, R., Errico, M.E., Di Pace, E., Ambrogi, V., Avella, M., 
Cocca, M., 2018a. Pectin based finishing to mitigate the impact of microplastics 
released by polyamide fabrics. Carbohydr. Polym. 198 (May), 175 – 180. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2018.06.062 . 
De Falco, F., Gullo, M.P., Gentile, G., Di Pace, E., Cocca, M., Gelabert, L., Brouta- 
Agn ´esa, M., Rovira, A., Escudero, R., Villalba, R., Mossotti, R., Montarsolo, A., 
Gavignano, S., Tonin, C., Avella, M., 2018b. Evaluation of microplastic release 
caused by textile washing processes of synthetic fabrics. Environ. Pollut. 236, 
916 – 925. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2017.10.057 . 
De Falco, F., Cocca, M., Guarino, V., Gentile, G., Ambrogi, V., Ambrosio, L., Avella, M., 
2019. Novel finishing treatments of polyamide fabrics by electrofluidodynamic 
process to reduce microplastic release during washings. Polym. Degrad. Stabil. 165, 
110 – 116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2019.05.001 . 
ECHA, 2019. Restriction Report - Proposal. https://echa.europa.eu/registry-of-restrictio 
n-intentions/-/dislist/details/0b0236e18244cd73 . 
Edo, C., Gonz ´alez-Pleiter, M., Legan ´es, F., Fern ´andez-Pi ˜nas, F., Rosal, R., 2020. Fate of 
microplastics in wastewater treatment plants and their environmental dispersion 
with effluent and sludge. Environ. Pollut. 259 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
envpol.2019.113837 . 
EEA, 2017. Urban waste water treatment. In: Official Journal of the European Union 
(Issue L). http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri = CELEX:31991 
L0271 & from = EN . 
Eerkes-Medrano, D., Leslie, H.A., Quinn, B., 2019. Microplastics in drinking water: a 
review and assessment. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sci. Health 7, 69 – 75. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.coesh.2018.12.001 . 
Elgarahy, A.M., Elwakeel, K.Z., Mohammad, S.H., Elshoubaky, G.A., 2021a. A critical 
review of biosorption of dyes , heavy metals and metalloids from wastewater as an 
efficient and green process. Clean. Eng. Technol. 4 (July), 100209. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.clet.2021.100209 . 
Elgarahy, A.M., Akhdhar, A., Elwakeel, K.Z., 2021b. Microplastics prevalence , 
interactions , and remediation in the aquatic environment : a critical review. 
J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 9 (5), 106224. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2021.106224 . 
Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2017. A New Textiles Economy: Redesigning Fashion ’ s 
Future. http://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications . 
Elwakeel, K.Z., Elgarahy, A.M., Khan, Z.A., Almughamisi, M.S., Al-bogami, A.S., 2020. 
Perspectives Regarding Metal/mineral-Incorporating Materials for Water 
Purification: with Special Focus on Cr(VI) Removal, pp. 1546 – 1574. https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/d0ma00153h . 
Folk ¨o, A., 2015. Quantification and Characterization of Fibers Emitted from Common 
Synthetic Materials during Washing . 
Fossi, M.C., Coppola, D., Baini, M., Giannetti, M., Guerranti, C., Marsili, L., Panti, C., de 
Sabata, E., Cl `o, S., 2014. Large filter feeding marine organisms as indicators of 
microplastic in the pelagic environment: the case studies of the Mediterranean 
basking shark (Cetorhinus maximus) and fin whale (Balaenoptera physalus). Mar. 
Environ. Res. 100, 17 – 24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marenvres.2014.02.002 . 
Franco, A.A., Arellano, J.M., Albendín, G., Rodríguez-barroso, R., Zahedi, S., 2020. 
Mapping microplastics in Cadiz (Spain): occurrence of microplastics in municipal 
and industrial wastewaters. J. Water Proc. Eng. 38 (August), 101596. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2020.101596 . 
Fu, S.F., Ding, J.N., Zhang, Y., Li, Y.F., Zhu, R., Yuan, X.Z., Zou, H., 2018. Exposure to 
polystyrene nanoplastic leads to inhibition of anaerobic digestion system. Sci. Total 
Environ. 625, 64 – 70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.12.158 . 
Galv ˜ao, A., Aleixo, M., Pablo, H. De, Lopes, C., Raimundo, J., 2020. Microplastics in 
wastewater: microfiber emissions from common household laundry. Environ. Sci. 
Pollut. Control Ser. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-020-08765-6 . 
Garcia, S., Cordeiro, A., N ¨a ¨as, I. de A., Costa Neto, P.L. de O., 2019. The sustainability 
awareness of Brazilian consumers of cotton clothing. J. Clean. Prod. 215, 
1490 – 1502. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.01.069 . 
Gasperi, J., Dris, R., Rocher, V., Tassin, B., 2015. Microplastics in the continental area: an 
emerging challenge. In: Norman Bulletin (Issue 4) .  
Gesamp, 2015a. Sources, fate and effects of microplastics in the marine environment: a 
global assessment. In: GESAMP, vol. 90 issn: 1020-4873%5Cnhttp ://ec.europa.eu/ 
environment/marine/good-environmental-status/descriptor-10/pdf/GESAMP_ 
microplastics full study.pdf .  
Gesamp, 2015b. Sources, fate and effects of microplastics in the marine environment: a 
global assessment. In: GESAMP, vol. 90 . 
Gies, E.A., LeNoble, J.L., No ¨el, M., Etemadifar, A., Bishay, F., Hall, E.R., Ross, P.S., 2018. 
Retention of microplastics in a major secondary wastewater treatment plant in 
Vancouver, Canada. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 133 (June), 553 – 561. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.marpolbul.2018.06.006 . 
Glampedaki, P., Kr ¨agel, J., Petzold, G., Dutschk, V., Miller, R., Warmoeskerken, M.M.C. 
G., 2012. Polyester textile functionalisation through incorporation of pH/thermo- 
responsive microgels. Part I: microgel preparation and characterisation. Colloids 
Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 413, 334 – 341. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
colsurfa.2012.06.022 . 
UNEP, Grid-Arendal, 2016. Marine Litter Vital Graphics. http://www.unep.org/regionals 
eas/marinelitter/publications/docs/anl_oview.pdf . 
Gündo ˘gdu, S., Çevik, C., Güzel, E., Kilercio ˘glu, S., 2018. Microplastics in municipal 
wastewater treatment plants in Turkey: a comparison of the influent and secondary 
effluent concentrations. Environ. Monit. Assess. 190 (11) https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s10661-018-7010-y . 
GuppyFriend, 2021. The GuppyFriend Washing Bag. https://guppyfriend.com/ . 
Hamidian, A.H., Ozumchelouei, E.J., Feizi, F., Wu, C., Zhang, Y., Yang, M., 2021. 
A review on the characteristics of microplastics in wastewater treatment plants: a 
source for toxic chemicals. J. Clean. Prod. 295, 126480. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jclepro.2021.126480 . 
Hartline, N.L., Bruce, N.J., Karba, S.N., Ru, E.O., Sonar, S.U., Holden, P.A., 2016. 
Microfiber masses recovered from conventional machine washing of new or aged 
garments. Environ. Sci. Technol. 50, 11532 – 11538. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
est.6b03045 . 
He, C., Xia, W., Zhou, C., Huang, D., Zhang, C., Song, B., 2022. Rational Design to 
Manganese and Oxygen Co-doped Polymeric Carbon Nitride for Efficient Nonradical 
Activation of Peroxymonosulfate and the Mechanism Insight, p. 430. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.132751 . October 2021.  
Henry, B., Laitala, K., Grimstad, I., 2019. Microfibres from apparel and home textiles: 
prospects for including microplastics in environmental sustainability assessment. Sci. 
Total Environ. 652, 483 – 494. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.10.166 . 
Herweyers, L., Carteny, C.C., Scheelen, L., Watts, R., Bois, E. Du, 2020. Consumers ’ 
perceptions and attitudes toward products preventing microfiber pollution in aquatic 
environments as a result of the domestic washing of synthetic clothes. Sustainability 
12 (6). https://doi.org/10.3390/su12062244 . 
InfoDev, 2008. The global textile and garments industry: the role of information and 
communication technologies (ICTs) in exploiting the value chain. In: Information for 
Development Program, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ 
The World Bank. https://www.infodev.org/infodev-files/resource/InfodevDo 
cuments_582.pdf . 
F. Belzagui and C. Guti ´errez-Bouz ´an                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Journal of Environmental Management 317 (2022) 115347
11
Islam, Z., 2019. Comparing quality parameters of yarn produced by ring, rotor, and 
compact spinning system. Eur. Sci. J. ESJ 15 (3), 461 – 477. https://doi.org/ 
10.19044/esj.2019.v15n3p461 . 
Jemec, A., Horvat, P., Kunej, U., Bele, M., Krzan, A., 2016. Uptake and effects of 
microplastic textile fibers on freshwater crustacean Daphnia magna. Environ. Pollut. 
219, 201 – 209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2016.10.037 . 
Kapp, K.J., Miller, R.Z., 2020. Electric clothes dryers: an underestimated source of 
microfiber pollution. PLoS One 1 – 17. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
pone.0239165 . 
Koelmans, A.A., Mohamed Nor, N.H., Hermsen, E., Kooi, M., Mintenig, S.M., De 
France, J., 2019. Microplastics in freshwaters and drinking water: critical review and 
assessment of data quality. Water Res. 155, 410 – 422. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
watres.2019.02.054 . 
Kosuth, M., Mason, S.A., Wattenberg, E.V., 2018. Anthropogenic contamination of tap 
water, beer, and sea salt. PLoS One 13 (4), 1 – 18. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
pone.0194970 . 
Kumar, R., Sharma, P., Bandyopadhyay, S., 2021. Evidence of microplastics in wetlands: 
extraction and quantification in Freshwater and coastal ecosystems. J. Water Proc. 
Eng. 40 (December 2020), 101966. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2021.101966 . 
Lares, M., Ncibi, M.C., Sillanp ¨a ¨a, M., Sillanp ¨a ¨a, M., 2018. Occurrence, identification and 
removal of microplastic particles and fibers in conventional activated sludge process 
and advanced MBR technology. Water Res. 133, 236 – 246. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.watres.2018.01.049 . 
Leslie, H.A., Brandsma, S.H., van Velzen, M.J.M., Vethaak, A.D., 2017. Microplastics en 
route: field measurements in the Dutch river delta and Amsterdam canals, 
wastewater treatment plants, North Sea sediments and biota. Environ. Int. 101, 
133 – 142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2017.01.018 . 
Li, X., Chen, L., Mei, Q., Dong, B., Dai, X., Ding, G., Zeng, E.Y., 2018. Microplastics in 
sewage sludge from the wastewater treatment plants in China. Water Res. 142, 
75 – 85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2018.05.034 . 
Li, L., Geng, S., Li, Z., Song, K., 2020a. Effect of microplastic on anaerobic digestion of 
wasted activated sludge. Chemosphere 247. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chemosphere.2020.125874 . 
Li, R., Zhang, S., Zhang, L., Yu, K., Wang, S., Wang, Y., 2020b. Field study of the 
microplastic pollution in sea snails (Ellobium chinense) from mangrove forest and 
their relationships with microplastics in water/sediment located on the north of 
Beibu Gulf. Environ. Pollut. 263, 114368 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
envpol.2020.114368 . 
Lint, L.U.V.-R., 2021. MicroPlastics Lint LUV-R Washing Machine Discharge Filter. 
Environmental Enhancements. https://environmentalenhancements.com/store/i 
ndex.php/products/products-lint-filter . 
Ma, B., Xue, W., Ding, Y., Hu, C., Liu, H., Qu, J., 2019a. Removal characteristics of 
microplastics by Fe-based coagulants during drinking water treatment. J. Environ. 
Sci. (China) 78, 267 – 275. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jes.2018.10.006 . 
Ma, B., Xue, W., Hu, C., Liu, H., Qu, J., Li, L., 2019b. Characteristics of microplastic 
removal via coagulation and ultrafiltration during drinking water treatment. Chem. 
Eng. J. 359 (November 2018), 159 – 167. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2018.11.155 . 
Magni, S., Binelli, A., Pittura, L., Avio, C.G., Della Torre, C., Parenti, C.C., Gorbi, S., 
Regoli, F., 2019. The fate of microplastics in an Italian wastewater treatment plant. 
Sci. Total Environ. 652, 602 – 610. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.10.269 . 
Magnusson, K., Nor ´en, F., 2014. Screening Of Microplastic Particles in and Down-Stream a 
Wastewater Treatment Plant (Issue C 55) https://doi.org/naturvardsverket-2226 .  
Magnusson, K., Eliasson, K., Fråne, A., Haikonen, K., Hult ´en, J., Olshammar, M., 
Stadmark, J., Voisin, A., 2016. Swedish Sources and Pathways for Microplastics to 
the Marine Environment: A Review of Existing Data (Issue C183) .  
Mahbub, S., Shams, M., 2022. Acrylic fabrics as a source of microplastics from potable 
washer and dryer: impact of washing and drying parameters. Sci. Total Environ. 834, 
155429 . 
Mahon, A.M., O ’ Connell, B., Healy, M.G., O ’ Connor, I., Officer, R., Nash, R., Morrison, L., 
2017. Microplastics in sewage sludge: effects of treatment. Environ. Sci. Technol. 51 
(2), 810 – 818. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.6b04048 . 
Mao, R., Lang, M., Yu, X., Wu, R., Yang, X., Guo, X., 2020. Aging mechanism of 
microplastics with UV irradiation and its effects on the adsorption of heavy metals. 
J. Hazard Mater. 393 (December 2019), 122515. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jhazmat.2020.122515 . 
Mara, D., 2004. Domestic Wastewater Treatment in Developing Countries. EARTHSCAN 
PUBLICATIONS LTD . 
Maraseni, T., Cockfield, G., Maroulis, J., 2010. An assessment of greenhouse gas 
emissions: implications for the Australian cotton industry. J. Agric. Sci. 148 (5), 
501 – 510. https://doi.org/10.1017/S002185960999058X . 
Martel, B., Morcellet, M., Ruffin, D., Ducoroy, L., Weltrowski, M., 2002. Finishing of 
polyester fabrics with cyclodextrins and polycarboxylic acids as crosslinking agents. 
J. Inclusion Phenom. Macrocycl. Chem. 44, 443 – 446 . 
McIlwraith, H.K., Lin, J., Erdle, L.M., Mallos, N., Diamond, M.L., Rochman, C.M., 2019. 
Capturing microfibers – marketed technologies reduce microfiber emissions from 
washing machines. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 139 (August 2018), 40 – 45. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.marpolbul.2018.12.012 . 
Mermaids, 2017. Good Practice Guide (p. 2). o .  
Mermaids, 2018. Handbook for Zero Microplastics from Textiles and Laundry Good 
Practice Guidelines for the Textile Industry. http://oceancleanwash.org/wp-conten 
t/uploads/2018/10/Handbook-for-zero-microplastics-from-textiles-and-laundry-de 
veloped-2.pdf . 
Michielssen, M.R., Michielssen, E.R., Ni, J., Duhaime, M.B., 2016. Fate of microplastics 
and other small anthropogenic litter (SAL) in wastewater treatment plants depends 
on unit processes employed. Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol. 2 (6), 1064 – 1073. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C6EW00207B . 
Mintenig, S.M., Int-Veen, I., L ¨oder, M.G.J., Primpke, S., Gerdts, G., 2017. Identification of 
microplastic in effluents of waste water treatment plants using focal plane array- 
based micro-Fourier-transform infrared imaging. Water Res. 108, 365 – 372. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2016.11.015 . 
Mintenig, S.M., L ¨oder, M.G.J., Primpke, S., Gerdts, G., 2019. Low numbers of 
microplastics detected in drinking water from ground water sources. Sci. Total 
Environ. 648, 631 – 635. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.08.178 . 
Murphy, F., Ewins, C., Carbonnier, F., Quinn, B., 2016. Wastewater treatment works 
(WwTW) as a source of microplastics in the aquatic environment. Environ. Sci. 
Technol. 50 (11), 5800 – 5808. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b05416 . 
Muthu, S.S., 2017. In: Muthu, S.S. (Ed.), Sustainable in the Textile Industry. Springer. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-2639-3 . 
Napper, I.E., Thompson, R.C., 2016. Release of synthetic microplastic plastic fibres from 
domestic washing machines: effects of fabric type and washing conditions. Mar. 
Pollut. Bull. 112 (1 – 2), 39 – 45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2016.09.025 . 
Napper, I.E., Barrett, A.C., Thompson, R.C., 2020. The efficiency of devices intended to 
reduce microfibre release during clothes washing. Sci. Total Environ. 738 https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.140412 . 
Nelms, S.E., Galloway, T.S., Godley, B.J., Jarvis, D.S., Lindeque, P.K., 2018. Investigating 
microplastic trophic transfer in marine top predators. Environ. Pollut. 238, 
999 – 1007. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2018.02.016 . 
Nergis, B., 2017. An overview of hybrid ring spinning methods. Curr. Trends Fash. 
Technol. Textil. Eng. 1 (5), 94 – 96. https://doi.org/10.19080/ctftte.2017.01.555572 . 
Nizzetto, L., Futter, M., Langaas, S., 2016. Are agricultural soils dumps for microplastics 
of urban origin? Environ. Sci. Technol. 50 (20), 10777 – 10779. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.est.6b04140 . 
Ohkubo, N., Ito, M., Hano, T., Kono, K., Mochida, K., 2020. Estimation of the uptake and 
gut retention of microplastics in juvenile marine fish: mummichogs (Fundulus 
heteroclitus) and red seabreams (Pagrus major). Mar. Pollut. Bull. 160 (August), 
111630. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2020.111630 . 
ONU, 2017. World Water Development Report 2017. www.unwater.org . 
Ossmann, B.E., 2021. Microplastics in drinking water? Present state of knowledge and 
open questions. Curr. Opin. Food Sci. 42, 44 – 51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
cofs.2021.02.011 . 
Ossmann, B.E., Sarau, G., Holtmannsp ¨otter, H., Pischetsrieder, M., Christiansen, S.H., 
Dicke, W., 2018. Small-sized microplastics and pigmented particles in bottled 
mineral water. Water Res. 141, 307 – 316. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
watres.2018.05.027 . 
O ß mann, B.E., 2021. Microplastics in drinking water? Present state of knowledge and 
open questions. Curr. Opin. Food Sci. 41, 44 – 51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
cofs.2021.02.011 . 
O ’ Brien, S., Okoffo, E.D., O ’ Brien, J.W., Ribeiro, F., Wang, X., Wright, S.L., 
Samanipour, S., Rauert, C., Toapanta, T.Y.A., Albarracin, R., Thomas, K.V., 2020. 
Airborne emissions of microplastic fibres from domestic laundry dryers. Sci. Total 
Environ. 747, 141175. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.141175 . 
Patagonia, 2018. An Update on Microfiber Pollution. https://www.patagonia.com/stori 
es/an-update-on-microfiber-pollution/story-31370.html . 
Patterson, J., Jeyasanta, K.I., Sathish, N., Booth, A.M., Edward, J.K.P., 2019. Profiling 
microplastics in the Indian edible oyster, Magallana bilineata collected from the 
Tuticorin coast, Gulf of Mannar, Southeastern India. Sci. Total Environ. 691, 
727 – 735. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.07.063 . 
Peters, G., Li, M., Lenzen, M., 2021. The need to decelerate fast fashion in a hot climate - 
a global sustainability perspective on the garment industry. J. Clean. Prod. 295, 
126390. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126390 . 
Pham, N.B., Kuy, 2013. Decentralised domestic wastewater management in Asia – 
challenges and opportunities. In: Water Environment Partnership In Asia (Issue 
March). http://www.wepa-db.net/pdf/1403policy_brief/PolicyBrief_2013_1.pdf . 
Pirc, U., Vidmar, M., Mozer, A., Kr, A., 2016. Emissions of microplastic fibers from 
microfiber fleece during domestic washing. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 23, 
22206 – 22211. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-016-7703-0 . 
PlanetCare, 2021. PlanetCare. https://www.planetcare.org/en/ . 
Plastic Pollution Coalition, 2017. 15 Ways to Stop Microfiber Pollution Now. https:// 
www.plasticpollutioncoalition.org/pft/2017/3/2/15-ways-to-stop-microfiber-poll 
ution-now . 
Qin, R., Su, C., Liu, W., Tang, L., Li, X., Deng, X., Wang, A., Chen, Z., 2020. Effects of 
exposure to polyether sulfone microplastic on the nitrifying process and microbial 
community structure in aerobic granular sludge. Bioresour. Technol. 302 (January), 
122827. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2020.122827 . 
Rahman, S.S., Siddiqua, S., Cherian, C., 2022. Sustainable Applications of Textile Waste 
Fiber in the Construction and Geotechnical Industries: A Retrospect. Cleaner 
Engineering And Technology . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clet.2022.100420 . 
Raju, S., Carbery, M., Kuttykattil, A., Senthirajah, K., Lundmark, A., Rogers, Z., Scb, S., 
Evans, G., Palanisami, T., 2020. Improved methodology to determine the fate and 
transport of microplastics in a secondary wastewater treatment plant. Water Res. 
173, 115549. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2020.115549 . 
Rese, A., Baier, D., Rausch, T.M., 2022. Success factors in sustainable textile product 
innovation: an empirical investigation. J. Clean. Prod. 331 (May 2021), 129829. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.129829 . 
Rochman, C.M., Scherer, C., Alvarez-Mu ˜noz, D., Brennholt, N., Bourrain, X., 
Buchinger, S., Fries, E., Grosbois, C., Klasmeier, J., Marti, T., Rodriguez-Mozaz, S., 
Urbatzka, R., Vethaak, A.D., Winther-Nielsen, M., Reifferscheid, G., Maynard, T., 
Peck, L., Pretty, J., Prior, S., Takada, H., 2013. Plastics and priority pollutants: a 
multiple stressor in aquatic habitats. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47 (6), 2439 – 2440. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/es400748b . 
Rochman, C.M., Kurobe, T., Flores, I., Teh, S.J., 2014. Early warning signs of endocrine 
disruption in adult fish from the ingestion of polyethylene with and without sorbed 
F. Belzagui and C. Guti ´errez-Bouz ´an                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Journal of Environmental Management 317 (2022) 115347
12
chemical pollutants from the marine environment. Sci. Total Environ. 493, 656 – 661. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.06.051 . 
Rochman, C.M., Kross, S.M., Armstrong, J.B., onathan, B., Bogan, M.T., Darling, E.S., 
Green, S.J., Smyth, A.R., Veríssimo, D., 2015. Scientific evidence supports a ban on 
microbeads. Environ. Sci. Technol. 49 (18), 10759 – 10761. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acs.est.5b03909 . 
Rojas, J., Azevedo, E., 2011. Functionalization and crosslinking OF microcrystalline 
cellulose IN aqueous media. Int. J. Pharmaceut. Sci. Rev. Res. 8 (1), 28 – 36 . 
Rolsky, C., Kelkar, V., Driver, E., Halden, R.U., 2020. Municipal sewage sludge as a 
source of microplastics in the environment. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sci. Health 14, 
16 – 22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coesh.2019.12.001 . 
Rukhaya, S., Yadav, S., Rose, N.M., Grover, A., 2021. Sustainable approach to counter 
the environmental impact of fast fashion. Pharma Innov. 10 (8), 517 – 523 . 
Salvador, F., 2017. Micropl ´asticos t ˆexteis: emissao de fibras sint ´eticas na lavagem 
dom ´estica. Universidade de Sao Paulo . 
Salvador, F., Turra, A., Herminio, H., Leonardi, B., Baruque-ramos, J., 2020. Laundering 
and textile parameters influence fibers release in household washings. Environ. 
Pollut. 257 (113553) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2019.113553 . 
SAPEA, 2019. A Scientific Perspective on Microplastics in Nature and Society | SAPEA. In 
Evidence Review Report . https://doi.org/10.26356/microplastics . 
Sarkar, D.J., Das Sarkar, S., Das, B.K., Sahoo, B.K., Das, A., Nag, S.K., Manna, R.K., 
Behera, B.K., Samanta, S., 2021. Occurrence, fate and removal of microplastics as 
heavy metal vector in natural wastewater treatment wetland system. Water Res. 192, 
116853. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2021.116853 . 
Schymanski, D., Goldbeck, C., Humpf, H.U., Fürst, P., 2018. Analysis of microplastics in 
water by micro-Raman spectroscopy: release of plastic particles from different 
packaging into mineral water. Water Res. 129, 154 – 162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
watres.2017.11.011 . 
Shruti, V.C., P ´erez-Guevara, F., Kutralam-Muniasamy, G., 2020. Metro station free 
drinking water fountain- A potential “ microplastics hotspot ” for human 
consumption. Environ. Pollut. 261 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2020.114227 . 
Stawreberg, L., Wikstr ¨om, F., 2011. Does the energy labelling system for domestic tumble 
dryers serve its purpose? J. Clean. Prod. 19 (12), 1300 – 1305. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jclepro.2011.03.016 . 
Sun, J., Dai, X., Wang, Q., van Loosdrecht, M.C.M., Ni, B.J., 2019. Microplastics in 
wastewater treatment plants: detection, occurrence and removal. Water Res. 152, 
21 – 37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2018.12.050 . 
Svensson, S.E., Ferreira, J.A., Hakkarainen, M., Adolfsson, K.H., Zamani, A., 2021. 
Fungal textiles: wet spinning of fungal microfibers to produce monofilament yarns. 
Sustain. Mater. Technol. 28 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.susmat.2021.e00256 . 
Ta, A.T., Babel, S., 2020. Microplastic contamination on the lower Chao Phraya: 
abundance, characteristic and interaction with heavy metals. Chemosphere 257, 
127234. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.127234 . 
Talvitie, J., Heinonen, M., P ¨a ¨akk ¨onen, J.P., Vahtera, E., Mikola, A., Set ¨al ¨a, O., Vahala, R., 
2015. Do wastewater treatment plants act as a potential point source of 
microplastics? Preliminary study in the coastal Gulf of Finland, Baltic Sea. Water Sci. 
Technol. 72 (9), 1495 – 1504. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2015.360 . 
Talvitie, J., Mikola, A., Koistinen, A., Set ¨al ¨a, O., 2017a. Solutions to microplastic 
pollution – removal of microplastics from wastewater effluent with advanced 
wastewater treatment technologies. Water Res. 123, 401 – 407. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.watres.2017.07.005 . 
Talvitie, J., Mikola, A., Setala, O., Heinonen, M., Koistinen, A., 2017b. How well is 
microlitter purified from wastewater? – a detailed study on the stepwise removal of 
microlitter in a tertiary level wastewater treatment plant. Water Res. 109, 164 – 172. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2016.11.046 . 
TeGrotenhuis, W., Butterfield, A., Caldwell, D., Crook, A., Winkleman, A., 2017. 
Modeling and design of a high efficiency hybrid heat pump clothes dryer. Appl. 
Therm. Eng. 124, 170 – 177. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2017.05.048 . 
Teng, J., Wang, Q., Ran, W., Wu, D., Liu, Y., Sun, S., Liu, H., Cao, R., Zhao, J., 2019. 
Microplastic in cultured oysters from different coastal areas of China. Sci. Total 
Environ. 653, 1282 – 1292. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.11.057 . 
Tiffin, L., Hazlehurst, A., Sumner, M., Taylor, M., 2021. Reliable quantification of 
microplastic release from the domestic laundry of textile fabrics. J. Textil. Inst. 1 – 9. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00405000.2021.1892305 , 0(0).  
Trad, M., Miled, W., Benltoufa, S., Boughattas, A., Benslama, R., Fayala, F., Bakhrouf, A., 
2018. Chitosan hydrogel-coated cotton fabric: antibacterial, pH-responsiveness, and 
physical properties. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 135 (34), 1 – 9. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
app.46645 . 
Turner, A., Holmes, L., Thompson, R.C., Fisher, A.S., 2020. Metals and marine 
microplastics: adsorption from the environment versus addition during manufacture, 
exemplified with lead. Water Res. 173, 115577. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
watres.2020.115577 . 
Un-Water, 2021. Summary Progress Update 2021: SDG 6 — Water and Sanitation for All. 
UN-water Integrated Monitoring Initiative , 1 – 58. https://www.unwater.org/new-dat 
a-on-global-progress-towards-ensuring-water-and-sanitation-for-all-by-2030/ . 
Van Cauwenberghe, L., Janssen, C.R., 2014. Microplastics in bivalves cultured for human 
consumption. Environ. Pollut. 193, 65 – 70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
envpol.2014.06.010 . 
van Sebille, E., Wilcox, C., Lebreton, L., Maximenko, N., Hardesty, B.D., van Franeker, J. 
A., Eriksen, M., Siegel, D., Galgani, F., Law, K.L., 2015. A global inventory of small 
floating plastic debris. Environ. Res. Lett. 10 (12), 124006. https://doi.org/10.1088/ 
1748-9326/10/12/124006 . 
Vital, S.A., Cardoso, C., Avio, C., Pittura, L., Regoli, F., Bebianno, M.J., 2021. Do 
microplastic contaminated seafood consumption pose a potential risk to human 
health? Mar. Pollut. Bull. 171 (April), 112769. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
marpolbul.2021.112769 . 
Wagner, M., Lambert, S., 2018. Freshwater Microplastics - the Handbook of 
Environmental Chemistry. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-61615-5 . 
Wang, Z., Lin, T., Chen, W., 2020. Occurrence and removal of microplastics in an 
advanced drinking water treatment plant (ADWTP). Sci. Total Environ. 700, 134520. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.134520 . 
Wei, W., Huang, Q.S., Sun, J., Dai, X., Ni, B.J., 2019a. Revealing the mechanisms of 
polyethylene microplastics affecting anaerobic digestion of waste activated sludge 
[Research-article]. Environ. Sci. Technol. 53 (16), 9604 – 9613. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.est.9b02971 . 
Wei, W., Huang, Q.S., Sun, J., Wang, J.Y., Wu, S.L., Ni, B.J., 2019b. Polyvinyl chloride 
microplastics affect methane production from the anaerobic digestion of waste 
activated sludge through leaching toxic bisphenol-A [Research-article]. Environ. Sci. 
Technol. 53 (5), 2509 – 2517. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b07069 . 
Wei, W., Zhang, Y.T., Huang, Q.S., Ni, B.J., 2019c. Polyethylene terephthalate 
microplastics affect hydrogen production from alkaline anaerobic fermentation of 
waste activated sludge through altering viability and activity of anaerobic 
microorganisms. Water Res. 163, 114881. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
watres.2019.114881 . 
Weithmann, N., M ¨oller, J.N., L ¨oder, M.G.J., Piehl, S., Laforsch, C., Freitag, R., 2018. 
Organic fertilizer as a vehicle for the entry of microplastic into the environment. Sci. 
Adv. 4 (4), 1 – 8. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aap8060 . 
Welden, N.A.C., Cowie, P.R., 2016. Environment and gut morphology influence 
microplastic retention in langoustine, Nephrops norvegicus. Environ. Pollut. 214, 
859 – 865. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2016.03.067 . 
XFiltra, 2021. XFiltra . Xeros Technologies. https://www.xerostech.com/technologies . 
Xu, Y., Ka, F., Chan, S., Stanton, T., Johnson, M.F., Kay, P., He, J., Wang, J., Kong, C., 
Wang, Z., Liu, D., Xu, Y., 2021. Synthesis of dominant plastic microfibre prevalence 
and pollution control feasibility in Chinese freshwater environments. Sci. Total 
Environ. 783, 146863. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.146863 . 
Yang, Y., Yang, J., Wu, W.-M., Zhao, J., Song, Y., Gao, L., Yang, R., Jiang, L., 2015. 
Biodegradation and mineralization of polystyrene by plastic-eating mealworms: Part 
2. Role of gut microorganisms. Environ. Sci. Technol. 49, 12087 – 12093. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acs.est.5b02663 . 
Yousef, S., Eimontas, J., Stri ¯ugas, N., Mohamed, A., Abdelnaby, M.A., 2021. Morphology, 
compositions, thermal behavior and kinetics of pyrolysis of lint-microfibers 
generated from clothes dryer. J. Anal. Appl. Pyrol. 155 (January), 105037. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jaap.2021.105037 . 
Zamani, B., Sandin, G., Peters, G.M., 2017. Life cycle assessment of clothing libraries: can 
collaborative consumption reduce the environmental impact of fast fashion? 
J. Clean. Prod. 162, 1368 – 1375. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.06.128 . 
Zambrano, M.C., Pawlak, J.J., Daystar, J., Ankeny, M., Cheng, J.J., Venditti, R.A., 2019. 
Microfibers generated from the laundering of cotton, rayon and polyester based 
fabrics and their aquatic biodegradation. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 142 (February), 394 – 407. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2019.02.062 . 
Zambrano, M.C., Pawlak, J.J., Daystar, J., Ankeny, M., Venditti, R.A., 2020. Impact of 
Dyes and Finishes on the Microfibers Released on the Laundering of Cotton Knitted 
Fabrics. Environmental Pollution. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2020.115998 , 
115998.  
Zhang, Z., Chen, Y., 2020. Effects of microplastics on wastewater and sewage sludge 
treatment and their removal: a review. Chem. Eng. J. 382 (September 2019), 
122955. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2019.122955 . 
Zhang, X., Chen, J., Li, J., 2020. The removal of microplastics in the wastewater 
treatment process and their potential impact on anaerobic digestion due to 
pollutants association. Chemosphere 251. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chemosphere.2020.126360 . 
Zhang, Y., Diehl, A., Lewandowski, A., Gopalakrishnan, K., Baker, T., 2020. Removal 
efficiency of micro- and nanoplastics (180 nm – 125 μ m) during drinking water 
treatment. Sci. Total Environ. 720, 137383. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2020.137383 . 
Zhang, L., Liu, J., Xie, Y., Zhong, S., Gao, P., 2021. Occurrence and removal of 
microplastics from wastewater treatment plants in a typical tourist city in China. 
J. Clean. Prod. 291, 125968. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.125968 . 
Zhou, H., Zhou, L., Ma, K., 2020. Microfiber from textile dyeing and printing wastewater 
of a typical industrial park in China: occurrence, removal and release. Sci. Total 
Environ. 739, 140329. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.140329 . 
Zhou, C., Almatrafi, E., Tang, X., Shao, B., Xia, W., 2022. Investigation on the structure- 
performance of phthalic acid carboxyl position and carbon nitride towards efficient 
photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants. Separ. Purif. Technol. 286 
(December 2021), 120464. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2022.120464 . 
F. Belzagui and C. Guti ´errez-Bouz ´an                                                                                                                                                                                                       